[SEC] preface|To the Kind Reader
[H2] TO THE KIND READER.*
[BODY] <!--v2p322-->Ir is not of much consequence to know whether the Author delivered this Dissertation to his auditors in the Public School, before he was sent to the Synod of Dort by His Majesty the King of Great Britain, or immediately after his return; whichever it might be, the work certainly shews that he was a man of great genius, and most acute judgment, a Doctor who was truly an ornament to the School and the Professor's Chair, which indeed he left vacant to the great loss and grief of the University, when he was promoted to the Bishopric of the Church of Salisbury.
[BODY] <!--v2p322-323-->It is to be attributed to the iniquity of the times, that this Dissertation did not come to light sooner, for then under the pretext of restraining the itching desire of some, who it was exclaimed exposed nothing else scarcely to the people, but the most profound decrees of God, and especially of Reprobation, to the great prejudice of piety, some persons obtained from the-King a prohibition, that no one should publish any thing in writing or preaching on the questions controverted between the Calvinists and the Remonstrants.
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->These knotty and thorny questions, Whether the death of Christ is a universal remedy, that is, applicable to all, or whether it is a particular remedy, destined for the elect alone; whether there is an election of some persons to glory, and on the contrary, a preterition of others; whether election is from the mere good pleasure of God, or only from merits foreseen and conditionally: these knotty points, I say, no one hath explained better than this Author. Therefore, take and read him, and I am much deceived indeed, if you will not confess that he has satisfied you. Why should I say more ? To give you a foretaste, you have here, in
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->Chap. 1: An historical and not unacceptable narrative of the rise and origin of the question which is to be discussed concerning the death of Christ, and its intended latitude or extent. Then, in
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->Chap. 2: A Thesis concerning the death of Christ as a universal cause of salvation applicable to all men is confirmed by arguments. In
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->Chap. 3: It is vindicated from the objections of adversaries. In
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->Chap. 4: You will find a most lucid explanation of the distinction, for all men sufficiently, for the elect alone effectually, &c.
[BODY] <!--v2p323-->l omit the other Chapters, which you will understand better by reading the work itself.
[BODY] <!--v2p323-324-->Another Tract is added, which was written on occasion of a Controversy which arose among the Reformed Divines of France, On the gracious and saving will of God towards sinful men, The opinion of the Divines of England was desired on that question, because it seemed likely to contribute not a little towards establishing peace. In the Appendix, therefore, is the opinion of Dr. Davenant on that Galliean Controversy, which having been written with his own hand, and presented by his Nephew to the Most Rev. Archbishop of Armagh, we have taken care to place at the end of the book. Enjoy them, Candid Reader, and farewell.
[FN] <!--v2p322--> * This Address is taken from an Edition of the Dissertatio de Morte Christi published in 12mo. in 1683, and is the substance of a much longer one (as far as applicable to this piece) prefacing the Edition published in folio in 1659, together with the Dissertatio de Predestinatione et Reprobatione. Vide Life, &c. Vol. I. p. xlviii.
[SEC] diss|A Dissertation on the Death of Christ
[H1] 1|CHAPTER I
[H2] ON THE ORIGIN OF THE CONTROVERSY
[BODY] <!--v2p326-327-->IT is truly a matter of grief and exceedingly to be deplored, that either from the misfortune or the disorder of our age, it almost always happens, that those mysteries of our religion, which were promulgated for the peace and comfort of mankind, should be turned into materials for nothing but contention and dispute. Who could ever have thought that the death of Christ, which was destined to secure peace and destroy enmity, as the Apostle speaks, Ephes. ii. 14, 17, and Coloss. i. 20, 21, could have been so fruitful in the production of strife? But this seems to arise from the innate curiosity of men, who are more anxious to scrutinize the secret councils of God, than to embrace the benefits openly offered tothem. Hence it comes to pass that from too much altercation on the points, For whom did Christ die, and for whom did He not die? little is thought by mankind individually of applying to ourselves the death of Christ, by a true and lively faith, for the salvation of our own souls. It is my intention in treating of this subject to endeavour rather to appease strife than to excite it anew. Since, therefore, it is conceded by those who extend the death of Christ to all mankind generally, that as to its beneficial reception it is applied only to certain persons in particular ; and since on the other hand, those who restrain it to the elect alone, confess notwithstanding that its benefits extend to all that are called, yea, to all men if they would believe; both sides seem to acknowledge a twofold consideration of the death of Christ. For by both of them it is regarded as an universal cause of salvation applicable to all mankind individually if they should believe, and as a special cause of salvation applied effectually to certain persons in particular who have believed. If I should treat of the death of Christ under this twofold view, it will perhaps appear that in some things which are contested with eagerness, there are rather various modes of speaking than different opinions. I shall commence therefore with certain short and perspicuous propositions, first, those which are brought forward concerning the death of Christ as an universal cause of salvation applicable to all mankind ; and then I shall add other propositions on the death of Christ as a special cause of salvation applied efficaciously to certain persons, or at least infallibly to be applied in God's own time. Nor do I intend to enter into any contest, but to give a plain and calm exposition of the whole subject; not intending to engage with any disputant; unless he should oppose us in such a manner that we could not otherwise open the way to the discovery of the truth, than by contending with him, But before I bring forward the above-mentioned propositions, I shall premise some things concerning the origin of this controversy, and the sentiments of the Fathers respecting it, and other similar matters, which may seem necessary to the thorough understanding of the history of this controversy. For as in order to the cure of diseases it is of primary importance to be well acquainted with their origin and causes; so likewise in order to settle controversies, it is an essential advantage thoroughly to understand on what occasion they arose, by whom they were contested, in what manner and how far they were agitated by the antients. Let us therefore apply ourselves to a concise elucidation of this business.
[BODY] <!--v2p327-333-->I think then it may be truly affirmed, that before the dispute between Augustine and Pelagius, there was no question concerning the death of Christ, whether it was to be extended to all mankind, or to be confined only to .the elect. For the Fathers, when speaking of the death of Christ, describe it to us as undertaken and endured for the redemption of the human race; and not a word (that I know of) occurs among them of the exclusion of any persons by the decree of God; they agree that it is actually beneficial to those only who believe, yet they every where confess that Christ died in behalf of all mankind. Thus Clemens Alexandrinus (Pedag. cap. 11) says, That Christ freely brings and bestows salvation to the whole human race. And of the same opinion is Origen, lib. 5, contra Celsum, Jesus is declared to have come into the world for the sake of all who ever were sinners, that they might leave their sins, and give themselves up to God. With. whom agrees Primasius* on I Tim.ii. on the words Who gave himself a ransom for all: he says, For all men indeed, the biovud of Christ has been shed, but it is beneficial only to those that believe. From which disciple of Augustine, we may conjecture what was the doctrine of Augustine himself. Their adversaries were nevertheless accustomed to object to Augustine, and others who embraced his doctrine of predestination, that they taught that Christ was crucified for the predestinate alone, and from this objection of the Pelagians some in succeeding ages seized a handle for kindling the afore-mentioned controversy. This is manifest from the objections of the Vincentians,* in which this takes the lead, That our Lord Jesus Christ did not suffer for the salvation and redemption of all men. It is manifest from the Answers of Prosper to the Capitula of the Gallican Divines ;* where their ninth objection is given after this manner: That the Saviour was not crucified for the redemption of the whole world. The Semipelagians objected to this as new, invidious, and erroneous. But Prosper meets these objections, not by maintaining that Christ suffered only for the elect, but by shewing whence it arises that the passion of Christ is profitable and saving to the elect alone ; namely, because these only through the benefit of special grace obtain persevering faith, whereby they are enabled to apply to themselves the death of Christ. All others without the assistance of this special grace, through their own fault, either remain altogether in unbelief, or draw back from faith received, and therefore fail of the benefits of redemption. This is the tendency of the points in the Answer to the afore-mentioned objection of Vincentius, That as far us relates to the magnitude and virtue of the price, and to the one cause of the human race, the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole world: but those who pass through this life without the faith of Christ, and the sacrament of regeneration, do not partake of the redemption. A little afterwards, The cup of immortality, which is composed of our infirmity, and Divine goodness, has indeed in itself what as profitable for all, but if it be not drunk, it does not heal. Not dissimilar are the remarks brought forward in answer to the ninth objection of the Gallican Divines. For there it is confessed, although Christ may be said to have been crucified for those only whom his death profited, that is, for the regenerate, and those that believe to the end, ? may also be said, that the Redeemer of the world gave his own blood for the world, and the world would not be redeemed. Lastly, it clearly proves that Augustine did not teach that Christ died for the predestinate alone, because Prosper from his opinion extends the peculiar benefit of His passion, namely, the remission of original sin, to infants even not predestinated. (Resp. ad obj. 2 Gall. & Sentent. 2.) He who says, that the grace of baptism being received does not take away original sin from those who are not pyedestinated to life, is not a Catholic. Which opinion was embraced by the Synod of Valence* even some ages after Augustine, as it appears by the fifth canon. From these things it is evident, that although the seeds of this controversy were sown, yet that Augustine and his disciples would never be the patrons of the doctrine, That Christ suffered for the predestinated alone. But dismissing Augustine let us come to Pelagius and his followers. And here it is worth while to observe, that in the late discussions of this controversy, two errors contrary to each other have been attributed to Pelagius, but falsely. For those who contend that Christ died for the elect alone, say that the opposite opinion, namely, That Christ died for all, is one of the Pelagian errors. On the contrary, those who are on the opposite side, exclaim, that it is mere Pelagianism to say, That Christ did not die for all men. But they do injustice to both sides, to Pelagius and to themselves. With respect to the first, a certain learned man says, that this opinion concerning universal redemption and limited deliverance, was attributed to the Pelagians and Semipelagians; and supported by a certain passage of Augustine against Julian (lib. 5. cap. 3.) where he attacks the Pelagians in this manner, Go on still, go on; and as you say, In the sacrament of the Saviour infants are baptised, but are not saved ; are redeemed, but are not liberated; are washed, but are not absolved ; so also say, Blood is shed for them for the remission of sins, but they are not cleansed by the remission of sin. These are marvellous things which you say, they are new things which you say, they are false things which you say, and so on. But in this place Augustine disputes about infants only ; nor does he do this in order to shew that itis to be set down as Pelagianism, That Christ died for those who on account of their own unbelief are not saved, but that He died for those, or redeemed those who were not subject to sin, and therefore had no guilt from which they should be freed. For as it respects infants, Pelagius acknowledged in words that they were redeemed, but taught in reality that they had no need of redemption; as it is evident, since he contended, That there was nothing depraved in them, nothing held under the power of the devil; in one word, nothing which could be redeemed by so greata price. (August. Epist. 90.) This, therefore, is what Augustine finds fault with in him, not that he taught, That Christ suffered for all: Which opinion of Pelagianism it can be shown was not condemned in any Council that was formed against the Pelagians, nor in any work of Augustine written against the Semipelagians. He professedly writes against the errors ef the Semipelagians in his books, On the Predestination of the Saints, and On the benefit of Perseverance : yet he never attempts to infringe the proposition—That Christ died for all men. Whatsoever, therefore, may be concluded respecting the truth of this proposition (which will be seen hereafter) it is certain, that it was never accounted a Pelagian dogma, as some persons, leaning on weak foundations, have confidently affirmed.
[BODY] <!--v2p333-335-->But I come to the contrary proposition. For there is one who affirms that this also savours of Pelagianism, and writes that Pelagius taught, That Christ did not die for all men. Thus Grevinchovius,* in a Dissertation ou the death of Christ, with our countryman Ames,t says (p. 51), Pelagius taught (as Faustus of Ries testifies, lib. i. cap. 16) That Christ did not die for all men. Know therefore and consider, that this error which I have objected to you is common to you and Pelagius. Butt know not whether through design or ignorance he produces the egregious prevarica- Chap.1. ON THE ORIGIN OF THE CONTROVERSY. 325 tor Faustus of Ries* as a witness against Pelagius, who, under the pretence of opposing Pelagius, strenuously maintained his cause, and every where attacked the Catholic Doctors, concealing their names. But however serviceable a witness Faustus of Ries might be in this business, Grevinchovius committed a gross error when he thought that the above-mentioned opinion was to be attributed to Pelagius. If he had ever looked into the books of Faustus, he might easily have perceived that in that place he was not writing against the Pelagians, but against those who attribute all to Divine grace and mercy, that is, against Augusiine, Prosper, and the rest of the orthodox, whom he babbles against, as unlike the race of sectaries, but like to the Pelagians in impiety. (Faustus, lib. i. cap. 3 and 6.) If, therefore, Grevinchovius desires to prove from this passage that this opinion was heretical, he ought to exhibit it as a mark of Augustinian, not of Pelagian heresy. But in reality Faustus did the same as was before shewn, from the objections of the Vincentiaus, and the Capitula of the Gallican divines, other Semipelagians had done: That is, he calumniously imputed this opinion to Augustine and the orthodox, as necessarily connected with the doctrine of predestination; which nevertheless they never would acknowledge. But to return to Pelagius and the Semipelagians, who it is certain erred in some things about the death of Christ, although neither of the afore-mentioned opinions was reckoned among the antients the error of Pelagius. Pelagius himself erred, in the first place, not directly by extending the death of Christ beyond its proper limits, but indirectly and by consequence, by maintuning that all infants, whether elect or not elect, were free from original sin, whom nevertheless he affirmed were redeemed by the death of Christ. He extended, therefore, redemption by the death of Christ even to those whom he thought to be free from sin, as we said before: that is, he declared that those were redeemed by the death of Christ, who had no sins from which they could be redeemed. This is the senseless doctrine which Augustine continually explodes, namely, That through baptism the death of Christ is applied to those who had no sin that could be expiated by the death of Christ. The words of Pelagius himself are, Who is so impious as to forbid to a little infant of whatever age that redemption which is common to the human race ? (De pec. orig. cap 19.) And the Council of Carthage, in their Epistle to Innocent (which is the ninetieth among those of Augustine) relates that Celestius had already confessed in the Carthaginian Church, That the redemption even of little children was effected by the baptism of Christ. (August. Epist. 59.) Now they who in words admitted the redemption of children, held notwithstanding, (Contra duas Epist. Pelag. 4.2) That the same infants do not need the grace of the Saviour to deliver them from perdition, because they have not contracted any contagion from Adam which deserves damnation. They held, That baptism ts necessary for persons of all ages, in order that the baptised person might be adopted as a son of God, riot because he derived from his parents any thing which could be expiated in the laver of regeneration; In one word, That the grace of the Redeemer has in them what he may adopt, not what he may purify. (2 Hypognost. 5.) This, then, is the first error attributed to the Pelagians about the death of Christ, not that they affirmed that He suffered for all, as some have thought; nor that they denied that He suffered for all, as others falsely pretend ; but because they dared at the same time to hold these two opposite doctrines, That redemption through the death of Christ pertains to all men of all ages: and, That infants are altogether free from sin and damnable guilt, from which they could be redeemed. So much for the first error of Pelagius.
[BODY] <!--v2p336-337-->Secondly, the Pelagians or Semipelagians erred in explaining the universality of the death of Christ, bv joining with it an absurd, false, and very obscure condition. For thus Prosper describes their opinion in an epistle to Augustine: That our Lord Jesus Christ died for the whole human race, and that no one is altogether excepted from redemption by His blood, even if he should pass alt his life ina disposition most alienated from it. Of the same kind ts that assumption of which mention is made by the Church of Leyden in their book on the three Epistles (Biblioth. Patrum. vol. 9. part i. p. 1063), If any persons can be found who should say that the Lord was crucified for the wicked who shall remain in their wickeduess, it is wonderful and incredible if they are able to prove this from direct testimonies of the Divine Scriptures. The orthodox thought that a conditional addition of this kind should deservedly be rejected. For in the first place, it is uncertain. what the Pelagians meant by that addition. [f they meant that any benefit or advantage could be derived from the death of Christ by those who spent all their life in impiety and unbelief, they openly contradict the Scriptures, which do not promise any benefit from the death of Christ to such, but threaten them with eternal damnation on account of their contempt of the death of Christ. Moreover, if they would intimate that even those who die in their impiety and unbelief, if they had believed, that is, if they had not died in their unbelief, might have been saved by the merit of Christ crucified, through faith, they express their meaning confusedly and obscurely, and what they seem to assert in one part of the declaration, they foolishly deny in another. Lastly, if they mean by the aforesaid assumption, that Christ in offering up himself had considered any persons as finally unbelieving and impenitent, and yet under this consideration had offered up himself to the Father to obtain pardon and life for them, it is evidently false and erroneous. For as a physician does not think of restoring health to a sick man under this formal consideration, Even if he should obstinately contemn and reject the medicine which he had prepared: so neither does the Physician of souls will that the precious medicine of His blood should profit any under this consideration, However he may finally trample upon and despise it. It is therefore to be observed, that in shewing the opinion of the Semipelagians, many things are joined together by Prosper and Hilary, some of which agree with the truth, and others savour of error. What therefore they relate, that the Semipelagians declared that all men sinned in Adam, and that our Lord Jesus Christ died for the whole human race, and some other things, they do not mention as their errors, but to shew how far they agree with the orthodox, and that they may explain the whole series and connexion of the Semipelagian doctrine. Those then greatly err, who think that all the things which are attributed to the Semipelagians by Prosper and Hilary are erroneous and Pelagian. We assert therefore, that Augustine never attempted to impugn that proposition of the Semipelagians, That Christ died for the whole human race, but with all his might refuted the addition they had made to it; where he shews, that the property or benefit of redemption, that is, eternal life, belongs to the predestinate alone, because they alone do not pass through life in unbelief, they never die in their impiety.
[BODY] <!--v2p337-338-->The third and most grievous error of the Pelagians and Semipelagians about the death of Christ, respects the primary cause of a different event, namely, that this death of Christ infallibly brings eternal life to certain persons, and does not bring it to others. They referred it to the human will as the primary cause of this difference, presuming that God equally willed the salvation of all men in Christ, nor by a special decree of predestination endued some persons with that faith and perseverance through which they should apply to themselves the death of Christ for salvation. On the contrary, Augustine, with the orthodox, contended, that that persevering faith, by means of which the death of Christ brings salvation to individuals, is extended to the elect by a singular gift of mercy, and does not arise from the good use of free-will in the one rather than in the other. Here the controversy directly regards the grace of predestination and free-will, and obliquely touches upon the death of Christ, inasmuch as the orthodox, assigning a reason why it eventually brings salvation to some persons, always ascend to the Divine predestination, the Pelagians descend to the human will. Prosper, in his epis tie to Augustine, thus expresses their opinion in this matter, As it respects God, they say, that eternal life is procured for all; but as to the freedom of the will, that eternal life is apprehended by those who of their own accord should believe in God, and receive the help of grace through the merit of, their believing. A little afterwards, They fear to ascribe the merits of the saints to the Divine operation, nor do they think that that which is predestinated can admit of increase or diminution. The Semipelagians are not blamed by Prosper or Augustine because they assert that Christ died for the whole human race, but because having stated this, they infer that there is no special will of God in predestinating, by which he effectually produces that faith in the elect which regards a saving application to themselves individually of that death of Christ which was endured for all, but suspend it on the uncertain hazard of the human will. This is either the sole or the principal error against which Augustine contended in his books On the predestination of the saints, and the benefit of perseverance. This error also Prosper attacked in his poem On the Ungrateful; in which he teaches from the opinion of the Pelagians, that God equally willed the redemption of all mankind by the death of Christ,
[VERSE] <!--v2p338-->But each the voice of his free-will obeys,
[VERSE] <!--v2p338-->And of his own accord sends forth his mind
[VERSE] <!--v2p338-->T" embrace the offer'd light.
[CITE] <!--v2p338-->Cap. 10, &c.
[BODY] <!--v2p338-339-->Yet the same Prosper says, that God by his predestinating and operating will, would that those only should be redeemed to whom he should give those things, by means of which they should be infallibly led to salvation. And, lastly, he shews that this efficacious will of saving some by the death of Christ and not saving others, did not flow from the discriminating acts of the human will. To this those words (ch. 13) relate.
[VERSE] <!--v2p339-->Do the mind’s movements such results produce ?
[VERSE] <!--v2p339-->Does not free-will one cause effect in all?
[VERSE] <!--v2p339-->Then would God's wiil stand firm, or weakly yield
[VERSE] <!--v2p339-->As human choice directs, &c.
[CITE] <!--v2p339-->Cap. 13.
[BODY] <!--v2p339-->Prosper, then, does not oppose (what he elsewhere acknowledges) that Christ suffered for all, but, that God had willed that all men were equally redeemed in fact by the merit of the passion of Christ, and had committed the efficacy of redemption to the will of men. For this is that ulcer of Pelagian doctrine which Faustus of Ries, lib. 1. cap. 17, endeavours to conceal under the covering of these words : God as the Remunerator of their good will, redeemed the willing. And rightly indeed; but if we speak of efficacious redemption, He first made them willing, being the Inspirer of their good will. If the Pelagians had held this, that the death of Christ was beneficial to mankind according to the special decree and operation of the Divine will, the orthodox would never have objected to them as an error that they maintained, That Christ died for all. Hitherto (as we have seen) that controversy on the death of Christ was not formed or agitated between the orthodox and the Pelagians which is discussed in the present day. For neither did Augustine ever oppose as erroneous the proposition, That Christ died for the redemption of the whole human race: Nor did he ever acknowledge or defend as his own, Lhat Christ died not for all men, but for the predestinate alone. Let us now proceed, and from the records of antiquity search into the controversies about the death of Christ which sprung up after the age of Augustine.
[BODY] <!--v2p339-348-->After the death of Augustine and Prosper, Lucidus, a Presbyter, seems to have stirred up this question, which had been some time laid asleep. He taught in plain words, That Christ died not for all mankind, Against him arose Faustus, Bishop of Ries, the ringleader of the Semipelagians. He writes to him a terrible Epistle filled with anathemas. Among other things he pronounces an anathema upon those who teach that Christ had not died forall. At the close of this epistle he commands Lucidus to send it back to him subscribed with his own hand ; and threateus, if he should refuse, that he would accuse him before the Synod of Arles, which was then sitting, and had subscribed these letters and anathemas of Faustus. Lucidus being frightened at this thundering epistle, subscribed it, and thus condemned with his own hand the opinion which he had promulgated. A short time afterwards, the Synod of Leyden was assembled, which added some things to the decrees of the former Council, to which also Lucidus yielded his assent. There is extant an epistle of Lucidus to this Synod of Leyden, in which he condemns those who say, [That Christ our Saviour did not endure death for the salvation of all men; and, according to the new mode of preaching established in this Council, he asserts, That Christ our Saviour, according 10 the riches of his goodness, suffered death for all men. Both of these letters are extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum (p. 3. tom. 5), the names also of the Bishops being subscribed who are thought to have been at these councils. But the things which are boasted of in the name of these councils are not of much moment, since for the most part they rest merely on the veracity of the heretic Faustus. For if you set aside these letters of Faustus, you may in vain seek elsewhere the afore-mentioned decrees of the Council of Arles, as they are no where else to be found. Nor can those new decrees about preaching, of which Lucidus speaks in his epistle, be found among the canons of any Council of Leyden. The veracity of Faustus in these things is further diminished, because he seems to intimate in his Epistle to Leontius,* that those books on grace and free-will, which are so full of poisonous sentiments, were not only written by the direction of this Council of Leyden, but were also approved of by it. And moreover, he pretends that he inserted nothing in this writing besides the opinion of this Synod. But indeed it is neither true nor credible that so many learned men could be so deceived by Faustus, as to approve of Pelagian doctrine by his vote. I say these things, not because I wish to condemn as errors those things which are thought to be defined in this chapter by Faustus on the death of Christ, under the approbation of those Synods, but lest any one, in a controverted point, should attribute too much to the authority, or rather, to the bare name of Synods, of which we have nothing certain from remains worthy of credit. This also is an argument with me, that those Fathers of Arles and Leyden, could not have sanctioned, under so grievous an anathema, that no one should preach that Christ died only for the elect, because in the commentaries of the Fathers who lived in the subsequent ages, that mode of speaking is often found, or at least is left in doubt. Remigius of Rheims, on the 8th of Romans, at the words, He who spared not His own Son, but freely delivered him up for us all, says, for us all, that is, for those who are predestinated to eternal life. And on 1 Tim. ii, 6, Who gave himself a ransom for all, adds in explanation, Understand, for the elect. Yet, that there was some difference at least in the mode of speaking among the Doctors of that age, appears from this same Remigius. For on those words which are in Hebrews 11.9, That He should taste death for every man, he writes thus, Some Doctors understand this absolutely, that it means for all for whom He tasted it, that is, for the elect, who are predestinated to eternal life. But others understand it generally, that He tasted death for all, believing and unbelieving, saying, He died indeed for all, though all will not be saved. Gregory the Great, in one and the same Homily (Ez.1. 1. Hom. 2.) calls Christ The Redeemer of mankind, and the Redeemer of all, and yet afterwards subjoins, That this Redeemer of all delivered himself to death for the life of the elect. To these two I will add Haimon, Bishop of Halberstadt, who flourished about the year of Christ 850, and who in his Commentaries so touches upon this controversy, that he determines nothing certain on either side. On the 5th chapter of the latter Epistle to the Corinthians, he says, Christ came into the world, being born without sin, living without sin ; though innocent He died for all those who are predestinated to life. And as Prosper says, and John Chrysostom, and other Doctors, although all do not believe, He did his part, dying for all. A little after, on those words, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, he says, Through Christ He reconciled to himself the world, that is, all those who were predestinated. In the 2d Chapter to the Hebrews also, he mentions both opinions, in the same words as we shewed Remigius had used before. We see, therefore, that these holy Fathers did not much care for that anathema fortified by the authority of Councils, which Faustus brings forward; but notwithstanding retained to themselves the liberty of writing and speaking. Yet I think that it ought to be added, that those Fathers, when they restrict the death of Christ to the predestinate, do not do it absolutely ; but in consideration of the saving effect which, by means of faith, it brings to them alone: and on the other hand, when they extend this death of Christ to all, they do not extend to all that special will of God in calling them according to his own purpose, in giving them faith, and effectually working in certain individuals according to his own counsel and operation, that they may reap the benefit of the death of Christ. Therefore they so understand the universality of redemption that they did not subvert the secret counsel of predestination, in which thing they differed widely from the Pelagians and Senipelagians. ‘They also understood redemption in such a restricted sense, that at the same time they acknowledged that it pertained to all men individually under the condition of faith. While Haimon himself (whom we just mentioned) was living, new tragedies were brought forward about this question of the death of Christ. For one Godeschalcus, a Monk, as Flodoardus* has recorded: (Hist. Remens. 3. 14), that he might make himself known to the people by the novelty of his doctrines, selected for himself certain subjects to be publicly discussed ; among which (not to speak of those which are not applicable to our present purposc) this was one of the chief: That our Lord Jesus Christ was not crucified and put to death for the redemption of the whole world, that is, not for the salvation and redemption of all mankind, but only for those who are saved. Which is the same as if he had said, only for the predestinated. This sentiment of Godeschalcus was discussed and condemned first by the Synod of Mentz,* and afterwards by Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims, who assembled another Synod, and committed Godeschalcus himself to confinement in a monastery, that he might not disseminate his errors. They published also some opinions opposite to the sentiments of Godeschalcus, in which what regards our present case is as follows, (Bibl. Pat. vol. 9. p. 1093. Eccl. Lugd.) Our Lord Jesus Christ, as no man is, was, or will be, whose nature was not assumed by Him, so no man is, was, or will be, for whom He did not suffer, although all are not redeemed by the mystery of his passion. But this definition of Hincmar of Rheims, and the other Bishops who adhered to it, was disapproved of at Leyden, where Remigius presided. Therefore they undertook an examination of the four opinions of Hinemar which were opposite to those of Godeschalcus ; and particularly of that opinion of Godeschalcus, which referred to the death of Christ, of which they speak thus, We would wish that nothing should be spoken or defined confusedly and inconsiderately on this subject; since it has us own depth and difficulty, which should be di:igently searched out from the truth of the Holy Scriptares and the authority of the orthodox Fathers, and not determined by our presumption. And they so far disapproved of the definition of Hincmar which was opposed to the doctrine of Godeschalcus, that they wrote about it in this manner: (Bibl. Pat. vol. 9. p. 1058. Eccl. Lugd.) What else can we answer respecting this your definition, but that we would earnestly request and admonish those who gave it, that they would endeavour vigilantly and faithfully to examine, lest by consideri: g too little what has been said, they should speak such things contrary to the faith and their own consciences, and destroy their own definition by the things before spoken of. Nor did the Church of Leyden think it sufficient to refute in writing some things which were contained in those definitions of Hincmar, but, together with the Bishops of Arles and Vienne in the Synod of Valence, confirmed canons in which some things are restored which they thought blameable in the opinions of Godeschalcus, and some things also which they judged worthy of reproof in those of the adversaries of Godeschalcus. Omitting the rest, we mention only those things which were discussed and confirmed respecting the present controversy , against Hincmar, and those who favoured his views. They, as you have heard, determined, That no man ever had been, was, or would be, for whom Christ did not suffer. But'the Church of Leyden distributed the whole hnman race, as it were, into certain classes. The first order is of those who are elected to eternal life; of whom none can perish, and who are all saved. The second is of those that believe, who by a right faith receive the grace of baptism, and by at are cleansed from their sins, but afterwards turn away from the faith, and die in their unbelief. The third is of those who being as yet in unbelief, are nevertheless by the mercy of God to be called to the faith, and to be cleansed by baptism. They profess that Jesus Christ came into the world and was crucified for these three classes of mankind, that he might save them. Two other classes of mankind are excluded from the benefit of the death of Christ. One is of those who from the beginning of the world until the coming of Christ, died in their impiety. The other is of those who since the advent and passion of Christ even to the end of the world, shall continue in unbelief. (Eccl. Lugd. p. 1094 and 1058.) To which plainly agree the decrees of the Council of Valence, in the fourth and fifth canons. But in these different opinions of Hincmar and Remigius two things are to be observed: One is that Remigins and the council of Valence, although they did not approve the sentiment of those who extended the death of Christ to all men individually, yet they have not confined it to the predestinate alone. The other is, That in this difference of opinions, those ancient Fathers cultivated the peace of the church, and did not interrupt it in order to accuse each other of heresy. Which may evidently be collected from the words of the church of Leyden, which after the refutation of the opinions of their adversaries, adds these words (Eccl. Lugd. p. 1063), We much wish that their opinion, although it proceeds from their piety, yet for peace sake, and the venerated piety of the most blessed Fathers, may not be renewed. Therefore vo dispute should be engaged in by one against the other, nor shoud one sentiment be condemned rather than the other. And because it may truly happen that there is something concealed in this matter, through our ignorance, nothing should be rashly defined, so that in whichever mode of speaking any one may acquiesce, he should not be esteemed a heretic, unless he become such through his contentiousness. Y wish that in this litigious age we had before our eyes this specimen of Christian charity and modesty, by which, as it appears to me, that tempest which was excited by the preaching of Godeschalcus was so happily settled and appeased. For in the following ages I find no contests about the aforesaid controversy. At length theological questions came into the hands of the Schoolmen, who, although they were fruitful artificers of disputes, yet were unwilling to renew this subject. To them it seemed sufficient to teach that Christ died for all sufficiently, for the predestinated effectually ; which, since no one could deny, no handle was given for using the saw of contention. The Doctors of the Reformed Church also from the beginning spoke in such a manner on the death of Christ, that they afforded no occasion of reviving the contest. For they taught, That it was proposed and offered to all, but apprehended and applied to the obtaining of eternal life only by those that believe. At the same time, they judged it improper to mingle the hidden mystery of Election and Preterition with this doctrine of the Redemption of the human race through Christ, in such a manner as to exclude any one, before he should exclude himself by his own unbelief. Let us hear their own words. Philip Melancthon constantly admonishes that we should not unseasonably mix the speculation of predestination with the promises of the Gospel. In his Common-places, On the promises of the Gospel, page 195, he writes thus: As 2t is necessary to know that the Gospel is a gratuitous promise, so it. is necessary to know that the Gospel is an universal promise, that is, that reconciliation is offered and promised to all mankind. It is necessary to hold that this promise is universal, in opposition to any dangerous imaginations on predestination, lest we should reason that this promise pertains to a few others and to ourselves. But we declare, that the promise of the Gospel ts universal. And to this are brought those universal expressions, which are used constantly in the Scriptures, such as, GoD so LOVED THE WORLD, THAT HE GAVE HIS ONLY BEGOTTEN SON, THAT WHO- SOBVER BELIEVETH IN HIM SHOULD NOT PERISH, BUT HAVE EVERLASTING LIFE. And the reason why all do not obtain the promises of the Gospel, is because all do not believe 4, Calvin in many places gives his opinion in the same manner. On the same words, John iii. 16, God so loved the world, &c. he says, He hath put an universal mark, both that he might invite all men promiscuously to the participation of life, and that he might leave the unbelieving without excuse. For this is the meaning of the word worn. For although . there is nothing found in the world worthy of the Divine favour, yet he shews himself to be propitious to the whole world ; since he calls all without exception to believe in Christ. A little afterwards : It appears that Christ is set before all, but God opens the eyes of the elect alone to seek himin faith. And on Rom. v. 18, He makes grace common to all, because it is set before all, not because it is actually extended to all. For although Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world, and through the goodness of God is offered to all indifferently, yet all do not apprehend him. So likewise Bullinger,* on Rev. v. Serm. 28, The Lord died for all: bui all are not partakers of this redemption, through their own fault. Otherwise the Lord excludes no one but him who excludes himself by his own unbelief and faithlessness. Benedict Aretius* has similar expressions on 1 Tim. ii. Christ, says he, died for all, yet notwithstanding all do not embrace the benefit of his death, because by their own wickedness, and the corruption of their nature, they despise the offered grace. To these I add Musculus; who in his Common-places speaks thus (On the redemption of the human race, page 151); The title of this section professes what is for our purpose, viz. The redemption of the human race. After a few words, he adds, We know that all are not partakers of this redemption ; but the perdition of those who are not saved by no means hinders this redemption from being called universal, since it is not destined Jor one nation, but for the whole world. A little afterwards : That reprobate and deplorably wicked men do not receive it, is not through any defect iu the grace of God, nor is it just that on account of the children cf perdition, it should lose the glory and title of universal redemption, since it is prepared for all, and all are called to it. To all these may be added Zanchius,* who so defends predestination, that at the same time he contends that Christ died for all. For when he had taught that Christ had not died for all, as it regards the omnipotent will of God, that 1s, his absolute good pleasure of conferring eternal life on all mankind, through the death of Christ, yet he subjoins, That it is not false that Christ died for all men as it regards his conditional will, that is, if they are willing to become partakers of his death through faith. For the death of Christ is set before all in the Gospel, and no one is excluded from it, but he who excludes himself. (Miscel. de Pred. Sanctor. Explic. Thes. 13.) That I may not be tiresome, I omit the rest. This is one thing I should wish to be observed, That our orthodox Doctors so explained the doctrines of election and reprobation, that the decree concerning the chusing of certain individual persons to the infallible obtaining of eternal life, and passing by others, might not infringe the universality of the redemption accomplished by the death of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p348-->Hitherto we have briefly surveyed those things which relate to the historical knowledge of this controversy. From which it is manifest, not only that the antient Fathers, but also our modern Divines, confessed that the death of Christ pertained in some manner to the whole human race. Yetin our age it has pleased some Divines to pass over these limits, and openly to defend in exclusive terms this proposition, That Christ died for the elect alone. To whom on the opposite side others reply, That Christ offered himself to God the Father to redeem all individuals equally. That we may throw some light upon this question, we will now enter upon that twofold consideration of the death of Christ of which we have before made mention, and will reduce it to certain propositions.
[H1] 2|CHAPTER II
[H2] ON THE DEATH OF CHRIST, AS THE UNIVERSAL CAUSE OF SALVATION, APPLICABLE TO ALL MANKIND
[BODY] <!--v2p349-->WE enter now on our subject, and in the first place propose to consider the death of Christ as it is generally represented in the holy Scriptures, and ought to be regarded by us, as an universal remedy appointed by God, and applicable for salvation to the whole human race. Then we shall proceed to the other point in dispute respecting the death of Christ, and take into consideration how far it may be viewed as a particular remedy, by the special decree of God to be efficaciously and infallibly applied to the salvation of particular persons. Should we be able to elucidate these two points, it will have a considerable tendency both to remove the difficulties with which the controversy on the death of Christ is involved, and to assuage the heat of theologians who have been warmly engaged in polemic discussion. In the former of these views with regard to the death of Christ, several propositions will occur to be discussed, of which the first and chief, as the basis of the rest, may be stated in these words :
[BODY] <!--v2p349-352-->l. The death of Christ is represented in holy Scripture as an universal remedy, by the ordinance of God, and the nature of the thing itself, applicable for salvation to all and every individual of mankind. This proposition is first to be explained, then to be confirmed by testimonies and arguments, and lastly, to be defended against the objections which are brought against it. With respect to the explanation of the terms, when we speak of the death of Christ, we comprehend in it the whole obedience of Christ, active and passive, the completion of which, and as it were the last act, was effected in his death; on which account Divines are accustomed by synecdoche to attribute to his death what relates to his entire obedience. Whatever therefore Christ did, and whatever he suffered, from the cradle to the cross, the whole of the meritorious and satisfactory work of the Redeemer we comprehend in our proposition to be allied to and connected with his death. Thus the Apostle, in Rom. v. 19, makes the obedience of Christ, universally considered, the cause of man’s salvation, By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. And in Phillip. ii. 7, 8, when it is said, That he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, the Apostle does not exclude from his meritorious work any part of the antecedent obedience of Christ, but rather considers it included, and teaches that this meritorious obedience of Christ began at that time when he took the form of a servant, and was consummated when he offered himself on the cross. Under the word death, then, we comprehend that infinite treasure of merits which the Mediator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ, by doing and suffering, procured and laid up for our benefit. Again, when we say that this death or this merit ts represented in the holy Scriptures as the universal cause of salvation, we mean, That according to the will of God explained in his word, this remedy is proposed indiscriminately to every individual of the human race for salvation, but that it cannot savingly profit any one without a special application. For an universal cause of salvation, or an universal remedy, includes these two things: first, that of itself it can cure and save all and every individual: secondly, that for the production of this determinate effect in each individual it should require a determinate application. Not unaptly, therefore, did Aquinas say, The death of Christ is the universal cause of salvation, as the sin of the first man may be said to be the universal cause of damnation. But tt is necessary that an universal cause should be applied particularly to each individual, that its proper effect may be experienced. Further, what we maintain in our proposition, that this universal cause of salvation is applicable to all and every individual of mankind, at once excludes the apostate angels, to whom (whatsoever may be thought of the intrinsic value and sufficiency of this remedy) according to the revealed will of God, its universality is not extended. Nor even with respect to men can it be extended so universally as to be applicable to every one under every state and circumstance. For it is not applicable to the dead or the damned, but to the living: nor to the living under every condition, but under the conditions ordained by God. The death of Christ was not applicable to Peter for salvation, ?f Peter had persisted in denying Christ to the last. And the same death of Christ was capable of application to Judas, if Judas had repented and believed in Christ. For this cause, therefore, we have not merely said that it is applicable to all and every individual of mankind, but on this being added, from the ordination of God, and the nature of the thing. For there is in the Gospel a certain ordination of God, according to which the death of Christ is applicable to all and every living man; which cannot be truly affirmed of demons or the damned. To this those words in the conference at the Hague seem to relate, in which the Contra-remonstrants endeavoured to shew some difference between the state of the devils and certain unbelievers. For the devils, they say, a Mediator was not given or ordained, but for men (page 154). A little after, Unbelievers, although they have deserved condemnation. yet there is at present some way and means through which they may avoid it, namely, if they should believe (page 155). Any sinner may know, even before he departs this life, that Christ died for him also, as far as pertains to the sufficiency of his merits, and also as to their application, provided only he should believe in him (page 156). Such are their sentiments. In which it is taken for granted, that the death of Christ is, according to the mode prescribed by God, applicable to any living person. And should it be objected, that it is not applicable to any person remaining in impenitence and unbelief, let it be remembered that the nonapplication in such cases arises not from the limitation of the remedy, but because the only mode of application appointed by God is obstinately rejected. For no remedy can be available if its application be obstinately refused and pertinaciously rejected even to the last.
[BODY] <!--v2p352-->Once more let it be observed, we do not affirm that the death of Christ at the moment of his dissolution, was actually applied to all and every individual of mankind, nor that after his oblation it was infallibly to be applied, but that, according to the appointment of God, it is applicable to all. For God hath ordained that it should be applicable to every individual through faith, but he hath not determined to give that faith to every individual, by which it may be infallibly applied. Why he should give this medium of application to some and not give it to others, ought not to be inquired, since it cannot be solved; but must be referred to the secret will of God. This may suffice for the explanation of our proposition: Let us now proceed to the proof of it.
[BODY] <!--v2p352-->And here it is to be shewn, not from human reason or fancy, but from the holy Scriptures, that the death of Christ, according to the will of God, is an universal remedy, by the Divine appointment, and the nature of the thing itself, applicable for salvation to all and every individual of mankind. From many testimonies I shall select a few:
[BODY] <!--v2p352-354-->1. The principal is that of John iii. 16, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish but have everlasting life. It is not difficult to deduce every particular of the aforementioned proposition from these words. For, in the first place, Christ given up by the Father to death, is here proposed as an universal remedy provided for the whole world. Then this panacea of the death of Christ is declared applicable for salvation to every man, and the manner or condition of the application is at the same time shewn in those words, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish. From this testimony we incontrovertibly conclude, that the death of Christ by the ordination of God is applicable to every man, and would be applied if he should believe in Christ. Shew me an individual of the human race to whom the minister of the Gospel may not truly say ; God hath so loved thee, that he gave his only begotten Son, that if thou shouldest believe in him, thou shalt not perish but have everlasting life. This, on the certainty of his believing, might be announced to any individual. Therefore the death of Christ is applicable to every man according to this will and ordination of God. I know that some learned and pious Divines, by the world here understand the world, or whole body of the elect, and rely on this argument, that it is said, the Son of God was given. that whosoever believeth in him should not perish: and the elect alone are they who so believe in Christ that they should not perish, but have everlasting life. But I answer, that nothing else can be inferred from hence, than that the death of Christ brings salvation eventually to the elect alone, and is actually applied by means of faith: but it cannot be inferred that it was not a remedy applicable to others, and by the ordination of God to be applied, if they should believe. We will illustrate this by a case in some measure parallel. Suppose that all the inhabitants of a certain city laboured under some epidemic and mortal disease; that the King sent to them an eminent physician furnished with a most efficacious medicine, and caused it to be publicly proclaimed, that all should be cured that were willing to make use of this medicine. Doubtless we might truly say of this king, that he so loved that city, as to send his own most skilful physician to it; that all who were willing to attend to his advice, and take his medicine, should not die, but recover their former health. But if any should object that this physician was sent only to those who should follow his prescriptions, and that his medicine was applicable by the appointment of the king only to those who were willing to take it, he would in reality not only make the beneficence of the king appear less illustrious, but affirm what was evidently false. For medical assistance was offered to all, without any previous condition on the part of the person sent, or of the sick ; healing medicine applicable to all without exception was provided. The willingness to receive the physician and take the medicine had no connexion with the intention of the Sovereign in sending the medical assistance, but with the certain restoration of health.
[BODY] <!--v2p354-->The antient Fathers seem to have been much pleased with this similitude. Prosper has respect to it, when Vincentius objected, That according to the opinion of Augustine, our Lord Jesus Christ did not suffer for the salvation and redemption of all men, he replies, For the disease of original sin, by which the nature of all men is corrupted, the death of the Son of God is a remedy. And a little after, This cup of immortality has indeed in itse’f this virtue that it may benefit all men, but if it be not taken it will not heal. Our faith therefore is required not merely to assent to the proposition, that God has given or ordained his Son to be a remedy for us, but that being given and ordained, He should be received by us to the obtaining of eternal life. Rhemi and Haimo enlarge the aforesaid similitude on those words Hebrews ti. That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. Whom, if you please, you may consult.
[BODY] <!--v2p354-355-->2. The second testimony is derived from two passages conjointly considered and compared. The first is John iii, 17, 18, God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believeth in him is not condemned; but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed tn the name of the only begotten Son of God. Let us annex to these words those of John xii. 47, 48,. If any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not to judge the world but to save the world. He that rejecteth me and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. In these words we learn that the Son of God was sent by the Father, that he might bring an universal remedy applicable to the whole world. Nor can the sense be restrained to the world of the elect. For, first, this world, to save which Christ was sent is divided into believers and unbelievers. But the world of the elect consists only of believers, or at least, of those who shall ultimately believe. Secondly, because some will be condemned, to save whom it is here affirmed Christ was sent. But none of the elect shall be damned. Thirdly, because those who are here declared to be condemned, are said to have come under condemnation because they have not believed in the only begotien Son of God, or, because they have rejected him. In which manner of speaking, it is implied in a way sufficiently perspicuous, that he was offered to them by God, and sent to save them. But how, or in what sense can we rightly understand that Christ was sent to save those who perish by their own fault, that is, through their own unbelief? Not otherwise than is expressed in our proposition; namely, that the death of Christ is an universal cause of salvation appointed by God and applicable to every man on the condition of faith, which condition these by their own voluntary wickedness have despised. Thus did Calvin understand these words; for on John iii. he has observed, That the word wonup is repeated again and again, that no one might suppose that he should be driven away, if he kept the way of faith. And on John xii. 47, he has observed, In order that the minds of all men might be inclined to repentance, salvation is here offered to all men without distinction, It appears, therefore, from these passages, that the death of Christ is to be proposed and considered as a remedy, applicable to all men for salvation, by the appointment of God, although it may be rejected by the unbelieving.
[BODY] <!--v2p355-356-->3. The third testimony we produce from Acts xiii. 38, &c. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man (Jesus Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins ; and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of tu the prophets, Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish. Then, in the 46th verse, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put at from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo! we turn to the Gentiles. From which words it is evident, That, by the appointment of God, the death of Christ is proposed and offered to mankind without distinction, as a remedy applicable to each and every man for the obtaining of remission and eternal life. It is plain, also, that according to the will and appointment of God, this remedy was applicable, not only to those to whom it is actually applied through faith, but even to the despisers, who rejected Christ and eternal life by their unbelief. And from the 48th verse it likewise appears, that faith itself, (by means of which the divinely appointed remedy applicable to all, is actually applied to some) is not found in unbelievers through their own fault, and is produced in them that believe through the special favour of a merciful God. And here the mystery of election at length presents itself. But let us not by an unreasonable and too deep speculation into an awful subject, draw a veil over that Divine philanthropy from which has emanated a remedy applicable to all and every individual of sinners, though certainly effectual only to all those who believe.
[BODY] <!--v2p356-359-->4. The fourth testimony is contained in 2 Cor. v. 19, 20, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. — 1t is to be observed in the first place, That the Apostle here lays down what he calls reconciliation procured from God through the mediation of Christ, as a common benefit for the whole world. And indeed to have reconciled the world generally can mean nothing else than to have ordained and granted to the world that universal remedy or propitiatory sacrifice of the death of Christ, which is applicable to all; Secondly, It is proper to observe, in what sense God is said. actually to have reconciled the world to himself, by the merit of the offering of Christ, namely, because the sacrifice of Christ being made, he will not impute their trespasses unto them; that is, He will not require from any man that he should make satisfaction for his own sins, that being impossible ; nor, further, will he punish any one for his sins who shall make use of this propitiatory sacrifice. And lastly, it is to be remarked, that this reconciliation, this not imputing of sins, of which the Apostle speaks, is considered as performed on the part of God and Christ, as soon as Christ is understood to have laid down his life for the sins of the world. But on the part of sinful men there remains the Ministry of the Gospel, by which it is made known to men; there remains that the Gospel should be believed, before men are brought as it were into the actual possession of this grace. And on this account the Apostle subjoined, after he had said that God in Christ reconciled the world to himself, nevertheless it behoved Ministers to discharge their embassy, and exhort all to be reconciled to God. From all which it appears, as we submitted in our proposition, that the death of Christ was ordained by God and preached by the Apostles as a remedy applicable according to the will of God, to all men for reconciliation and salvation; although, in order that men should be actually reconciled, there is need of previous repentance and faith. So Aquinas understood this passage, Be ye reconciled to God. This, says he, seems to be contrary to that which he said, God hath reconciled us to himself; for if he himself hath reconciled, what necessity is there that we should reconcile, for we are already reconciled. To this it is to be said, that God hath reconciled us to himself as the efficient cause, namely, on his own part; but that it may be advantageous to us, it is needful also that reconciliation should be made on our part. But Musculus has explained this whole passage so clearly, that we should be sorry not to bring forward his words: God, says he, reconciled to himself the whole human race, which was, and is, and will be from the beginning to the end of the world, when he gave his Son to death for all, Then again, after a few words: God reconciled the world to himself in Christ, not tmputing to them their sins, as far as relates to the work of reconciliation itself — prepared and sufficient for reconciling the whole human race. But since reconciliation cannot take place between the unwilling, the Ministry of reconciliation was appointed by God himself, by which all are called and invited heartily to embrace this grace. If the whole world would embrace it, certainly the whole world would be reconciled to God, all imputation of sins being removed, and would be saved, nor would any mortal perish. Lastly, this also is added; That the ministers of this reconciliation should preach nothing else than the reconciliation made by God, and so made that he might reconcile the world to himself through Christ, not imputing to them their trespasses. To preach this grace faithfully, and to call every one to repentance and faith in Christ, is to preach the word of reconciliation. Thus far Musculus. Those, therefore, who altogether apply themselves and adhere to the secret of predestination, so as at the same time to fritter away, and evidently to subvert this reconciliation of the world, overturn also the ground of our preaching the Gospel, which consists in this chiefly, that we assure every man, that God is so reconciled to him by the death of Christ, that if he believes in Christ, he will not impute to him his trespasses, but will bestow upon him eternal life. This work, confirmed on the part of God and Christ, is called the reconciliation and redemption of the world, although He hath not willed that the unbelieving and impenitent should be reconciled and redeemed. ‘Thus Prosper speaks (ad Capit. Gallor. object. 9.) The Redeemer of the world gave his own blood for the world, and the world would not be redeemed. Thus the Church of England speaks in the 31st Article, The offering of Christ once made is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, . both original and actual; and there is no other satisfaction for sin, but that alone. Thus also St. Paul speaks, when he says, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, that is, God, by giving his Son to death, himself supplied for his enemies an asylum of reconciliation, to which whosoever flees for refuge, has God so appeased and reconciled through the benefit of it, that he will at once receive him into his favour.
[BODY] <!--v2p359-->5. The fifth testimony is derived from the epistle to the Hebrews (chap. ii. 3, and iv. 1, 2, &c.) How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, &c. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them, but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief. From the whole of this discourse of the Apostle, it appears, in the first place, that in the Gospel, salvation is offered promiscuously to all those to whom it is preached; for on this very account it is called salvation. Then it appears, that this salvation which is laid up in Christ, and offered to men in the Gospel, is neglected and repelled by many, namely, by all unbelievers who have not faith in the promises of the Gospel. Lastly, it also appears, that this neglect and unbelief is the true cause which prevents the ungodly from obtaining the rest of the Lord, that 1s, which deprives them of eternal life offered to them in Christ. But none of these things can be said truly and seriously unless it is presupposed that salvation through the death of Christ is applicable to all men, according to the appointment of God. For who can properly be said to have neglected salvation, that is, the cause of salvation appointed and prepared by God, which never was prepared or appointed for him, or applicable to him? Or how does this neglect and unbelief exclude them from a participation in the salvation offered through Christ, who were entirely excluded from it on account of a defect of the appointment of God? We must therefore admit that there must necessarily be some appointment of God, according to which, Christ, as a cause of salvation, was applicable to them who fell from salvation by their own fault.
[BODY] <!--v2p360-361-->The last testimony is deduced from those passages combined, in which the will of Christ in dying is declared to be of such extent as to be the procuring cause of salvation to all. Of this description are, 2 Cor. v. 14, One died Jor all. 1 Tim. ii. 6, Who gave himself a ransom for all. Heb. ii. 9, That he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. And 1 John ii. 2, He ts the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Y omit other texts. These and such like passages, although the conclusion of some of the Remonstrants cannot be inferred from them, namely, That by this death of Christ reconciliation and remission of sins were acquired or obtained for each and every man: Or, That each and every man was restored into a state of grace and salvation by the death of Christ itself: nevertheless they prove in a manner sufficiently strong what we intend, That this death: of Christ was appointed and ordained by God and Christ for an universal cause of salvation, or an universal remedy for all men, applicable to the obtaining of reconciliation and remission. I do not therefore see by what right or what necessity some divines limit passages of this kind, in which Christ is plainly affirmed to have suffered for all, to the elect alone, or to the whole body of the elect alone, when in the aforesaid sense they may be most truly extended to all other persons. For nothing hinders but that that may be applicable to all by some Divine appointment which, from the predestination of God, is infallibly to be applied only to the elect. For they grant that dogma of ' the Remonstrants (Colloq. Hagiens. p. 139) That Christ died not for the elect alone, but also for other men, if it be understood only of the sufficiency of the merits of Christ ; but if only of reconciliation effectually or actually produced, they deny it. This is enough for me. For they will never rightly defend the alone-sufficiency of the death of Christ as to all, unless they confess at the same time that it is applicable to all for salvation, according to the appointment of God. Since it is foolishly and falsely asserted, that He died for all sufficiently, who is affirmed to have died only for the elect; because the word sufficiently is not a diminishing term, nor does it take away the truth of the thing affirmed. But more will be said respecting this, when we come to our second proposition. Hitherto we have contended from the testimonies of Scripture. Next we shall from certain arguments very solidly founded (as it appears to us) in the Scriptures. -
[BODY] <!--v2p361-363-->1. That death which brings some spiritual advantages even to those who are not saved, is not applicable to the elect alone: but the death of Christ brings advantages even to some who will not be saved. For the clearer understanding of the major, I now add that which I mentioned in the beginning, That under the name of the death of Christ, we include all that accumulation of the meritorious obedience of Christ, to which his death put as it were the last finish. For it is this infinite merit of the Mediator Christ, which God the Father beholds, when he bestows any spiritual benefit upon lost and miserable mortals in order to eternal salvation. If, therefore, it should be found, that even the non-elect receive certain benefits of this kind from the merit of Christ, then it will be evident that the death of Christ, as to some of its effects at least, is not only applicable to all men generally, but is actually applied to some who will not be saved. Let us proceed, then, to the proof of the minor, which alone can be doubted. In the first place, I ask, is it not to be esteemed of considerable advantage, that God should deign to call many even of the non-elect to repentance and faith, and, under the condition of faith, to eternal life? It is esteemed so, truly, by God himself, who calls the preaching of the Gospel, the word of life, (John vi. 68, Acts v. 20) the grace of God which bringeth salvation (Tit. ii. 11). Who says, Jt behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations (Luke xxiv. 46, 47). Who, lastly, calls this preaching of the Gospel, a treasure (2 Cor. iv. 7), and pronounces the feet of them that preach the Gospel beautiful (Rom. x. 15), and threatens the taking it away as the greatest punishment (Matt. xxi. 43), and declares that they shall be most severely punished who have despised and rejected this so great benefit. Luke x. 11, and 2 Thess. i. 8. All these things shew that the Gospel is a supernatural benefit granted even to those who abuse it. Secondly, if any one should obstinately deny that the preaching of the Gospel is a benefit granted by God to the non-elect ; yet no one would deny, that the enlightening of the mind, tasting of the heavenly gift, communication of other supernatural gifts, which are mentioned in Hebrews vi. are great and supernatural benefits, and conferred not for this corporeal, but for that spiritual life. But all these things are frequently given to those who are not of the number of the elect ; and they are given through and for the sake of Christ: For, Out of his fulness have all we received (John i. 16), and, To every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephes. vi. 7. Moreover, of some supernatural gifis we rightly: say with the Apostle, All these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. 1 Cor. xii. 11. To which I add, Whatever supernatural grace is given through Christ to any man, is given from the merit of Christ: for Christ does not confer any thing upon men which he hath not first merited for them by his obedience. Thus Bernard says (Serm. 13 in Cant.), Whatsoever wisdom, whatsoever virtue you think you have, attribute it to Christ, the virtue of God, the wisdom of God. The source of fountains and rivers is the sea: the source of virtue and knowledge is our Lord Jesus Christ. Ambrose speaks more generally on Ephesians i. Every gift of the grace of God is in Christ. ^o Lastly, even this is clear, that, in the opinion at least of all the antients, the death of Christ is, from the ordination of God, applicable also to the non-elect, because they expressly taught that it was applied in baptism for the remission of original sin to every baptised infant. Here is a principal and supernatural effect of the death of Christ, of the application of which to the non-predestinate there was no doubt in the antient Church, not even among those who held absolute predestination most rigidly. A very important witness to this is Prosper himself (Resp. 2. ad Capit. Gallor. & Sentent. 2. on the same capitula. To whom we may add the African Fathers, in their Synodical Epistle, and the Council of Valence, in the 5th Canon. By this first argument therefore we prove. that the meritorious efficacy of the death of Christ is not to be restricted to the elect alone, but is applicable to others from the ordination of God, and is actually applied as to certain effects.
[BODY] <!--v2p363-365-->2. He who by undergoing death by the ordination of God sustained the punishment due not only to the sins of certain individual persons, but of the whole human race ; His passion, by virtue of the same ordination, is applicable not only to certain definite persons, but to every individual of the human race. But Christ by dying sustained the punishment due to the sins of the world: Therefore, he willed that his death should be, as it were, an universal cause of salvation applicable to all. He who denies the major, is bound to shew why God willed that his Son should bear the sins of the human race, if he was unwilling to appoint in his death a cause at least applicable to the human race, although the application would not follow in many. We cannot conceive any other causes of this, than that it should please the Divine goodness and wisdom to exact from our Redeemer, and as it were to receive into his own hands, an universal ransom applicable to all. Ist. That in its application the liberty of the Divine will, doing what he will with his own, and his special kindness towards the elect, might more eminently appear. 2dly. That he might afford a specimen of great mercy towards the non-elect, at least towards those who are called into the church. 3dly. That unbelievers might be convinced in their own consciences, that a mode of liberating them was not wanting on the part of Christ, but that they were wanting to themselves, according to the saying of Christ, John v. 40, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. Now let us descend to the minor, in which it is affirmed, that Christ sustained the punishment due to the sins of the human race. Thus the Scriptures speak, AZ we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all, Isaiah lii. 6, Thus the Fathers speak, The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is the ransom of the whole world, from which they are excluded, who, either being delighted with their captivity are unwilling to be redeemed, or after redemption have re'urned to the same slavery. Prosper ad Capit. Gallor. sent. super. 9. Thus our Church of England, Article 2, Christ truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men. Lastly, they cannot deny this who are most accustomed to limit the death of Christ. The reverend and most learned Pareus* in his judgment of the second article of the Remonstrants, which he transmitted to the Synod of Dort, has these words, The cause and matter of the passion of Christ was the sense and sustaining of the anger of God excited against the sin, not of some men, but of the whole human race ; whence it arises, that the whole of sin and of the wrath of God against 3! was endured by Christ, but the whole of reconciliation was not obtained or restored to all. Act. Synod. Dordrect. p. 217. The force of the argument is, He who willed and ordained that Christ the Mediator should sustain the wrath of God due to the sins not of certain persons, but of the whole human race, He willed that this passion of Christ should be a remedy applicable to the human race, that is, to each and every man, and not only to certain individual persons ; supreme power being nevertheless left to himself, and full liberty of dispensing and applying this infinite merit according to the secret good pleasure of his will.
[BODY] <!--v2p366-368-->3. Whoever from the ordination of God may be called to believe in the Mediator, and they who by believing may obtain eternal life, to them the death of Christ from the previous ordination of God is applicable for salvation : But every living person may be called to believe in the Mediator, and by believing, according to the evangelical covenant, may obtain eternal life: Therefore, the death of Christ is applicable to every living person. The connexion of the major appears from hence, that a real call to believe presupposes an object prepared in which to believe, and this very possibility of being saved by believing implies a saving object, that is, That the death or merit of Christ was ordained as a remedy applicable to him to whom such a benefit is promised under the condition of faith. For if he should be called to faith in Christ to whom Christ was. not applicable from the ordination of God, faith would be required in a false object, or rather in none at all as to the ‘person called. For it would be the same as if the preacher of the Gospel should call upon a devil in human form, and living among men, to believe in Christ, and should promise eternal life to him, if he would believe. Sucha call would be erroneous on the part of the person calling, and useless on the part of the called; because he is called to believe in Christ, to whom Christ from the ordination of God is not applicable ; and salvation is promised to him under a condition, to whom, although he should be supposed to believe, salvation would nevertheless be denied on account of a defect of the sacrifice and covenant pertaining to him. This is not the case with any living person; therefore it must be confessed that the death of Christ is applicable to every one under the conditions of the evangelical covenant. The major being proved, I pass to the minor, which ought to be incontrovertible among. all the orthodox. For although the providence of God does not procure that every individual should know the Gospel, and so that all should be called to Christ; yet God himself has appointed that the Gospel should be a thing really to be announced to all. do and preach to every P creature. If any one preacher could go over the whole world, and come to every individual mortal, it would be lawful for him to offer Christ to every man, and, under the condition of faith, to announce and promise salvation to be obtained through Christ. For thus the Apostle himself speaks, Romans ii. 21, 22, Now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets ; even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference. The most learned Belgic Professors, in their judgment exhibited at the Synod of Dort, confess the same thing (Act. Synod. Dordr. p. 88). We confess, say they, that the merit and value of the death of Christ is not only sufficient to expiate all, even the greatest sins of men, but also those of the whole posterity of Adam, although there should be many more to be saved, provided they embraced it with a true faith. But it would not be sufficient to save all, even if all should believe, unless it be true that by the ordination of God this death is an appointed remedy applicable to all. If it be denied that Christ died for some persons, it will immediately follow, that such could not be saved by the death of Christ, even if they should believe. What is usually answered to this argument by some, viz. That God has not commanded his ministers to announce that Christ died for every individual, whether they believe or not, — but only for believing and penitent sinners, and therefore it cannot be demonstrated from the universality of the call, that the death of Christ is, according to the ordination of God, an universal remedy applicable to all, seems to me to be said very inconsiderately. For faith is not previously required in mankind, as a condition, which makes Christ to have died for them, but which makes the death of Christ, which is applicable to all from the Divine loving-kindness to man, actually applied and beneficial to individuals. The death of Christ was a sacrifice established in the Divine mind, and ordained for men from the beginning of the world; nor could it profit any one if he should believe, unless it had been offered for him before he believed. When therefore we announce to any one, that the death of Christ would profit him if he believed, we presume that it was destined for him, as applicable before he believed.
[BODY] <!--v2p368-369-->4. If all men, as soon as the doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ the Redeemer enduring death on account of the sins of mankind, is made known to them, are bound to be grateful and obedient to Christ, then it is certain that this work of the Redeemer in offering himself as a sacrifice to God, is to be considered as a benefit generally applicable to all; for there is no cause why we should say that they are bound to gratitude, or to the duties of obedience, on account of the death of Christ, who are altogether excluded from that benefit: But an Apostle testifies that every man may be excited to obedience by this argument. For to all men, after this mystery of the death of Christ has been opened to them, that may be truly said which is contained in 1 Cor. vi. 20, Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God’s. And also in 2 Cor. v. 15, He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again. Unless the death of Christ be understood as a remedy applicable to all, the foundation on which the ministers of the Gospel build exhortations of this kind, will be always uncertain, and often false: Always uncertain, because it cannot be known by men who are the elect. Often false, as often indeed as it is exhibited to the non-elect, who by this kind of redemption are not bound to live to Christ, unless it be presupposed that the sacrifice offered by Christ for the redemption of the world was for them. Moreover, Christ could not claim for himself any supreme dominion over each and every man in right of his death, unless the merit of his death were, according to the ordination of God, applicable to all for salvation. Since, then, To this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans xiv. 9, we ought, to extend his death to all, at least as to the right and power of a saving application; although the Spirit of Christ (who bloweth where he listeth) gives to men the faculty and will of applying, as well as the benefit of the death applied, according to the decree of his special mercy.
[BODY] <!--v2p369-370-->5. That work which truly and deservedly, as soon as it is understood to have been agreed upon between God the Father and the Son, gives to Christ the name of the Redeemer of the world and Saviour of the world, is to be acknowledged as an universal cause of salvation, or an universal remedy, applicable to the whole human race: But such was the work of the obedience of Christ unto the death of the cross ; Therefore it is applicable to the whole humanrace. The major is confirmed from hence, that on account of the price paid, Christ would be only a partial Redeemer and Saviour, if the price paid were not, according to the ordination of God, applicable to every individual of the humanrace. We therefore, who give to Christ the title of Redeemer and Saviour of the world, ought at the same time to grant, that this redemption from whence he is so named, was the payment of the price due for the liberating of the human race; which so far avails with God, that he cannot require any other satisfaction in order to reconcile any man to himself; and it is so far profitable to us all, that any sinner may be delivered, provided he should believe in this Redeemer, and (what in respect to remedies ought to be done) should apply to himself this saving medicine by faith. In this sense we truly say, that Christ died for all men, and that this death of Christ, or redemption acquired by his death, is a merit applicable to all men individually, which cannot in any way be affirmed of the fallen angels. Christ Jesus is, therefore, the Redeemer and Saviour of all men causally, as the Schoolmen say, that is, by instituting and supplying a sufficient cause, ordained and accepted by God, for expiating the sins of all those who are willing to make use of this remedy. This is a sufficient foundation for the title of universal Saviour and Redeemer, although the will of believing is not given to all. Now let us go to the minor, which is so plain that it does not need any laborious proof. The Scriptures, by yiewing this death of Christ as applicable to all, call him, the Saviour of the world ; John iv. 42, This is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world. They call the death of Christ, a ransom for all, 1 Tim. ii. 6, given for the redemption of all, and the propitiation for the si;s of the whole world, 1 John ii. 2. The Catholic church also, in her public prayers, has always named Christ the Redeemer of the world. But lest any one should pervert titles of this kind to that sense, as if Christ were called the Redeemer of the world because he hath effectually redeemed the elect dispersed through the whole world, I add this at the last, that both the Fathers and modern writers have asserted, that Christ is the Redeemer of the world in the sense laid down by us, namely, because his death is a ransom from the ordination of God applicable to all men individually. To this those words of Prosper apply (Ad Object. Vincentian.: Resp. 1.) On account of one nature of all and one cause of all undertaken in truth by our Lord, all are rightly said to be redeemed, although all are not delivered from captivity. And a little after, The cup of immortality which is made up of our infirmity and Divine virtue, hath indeed in itself what may be beneficial to all, but if it is not drunk, it does not heal. Those words of Musculus before quoted refer to the same thing (Common-places, p. 151). We know that all do not become partakers of this redemption, but the perdition of those who are not saved does not prevent it from being called universal redemption. For it does not arise from any defect in the grace of God that reprobates do not receive it, nor is it just that on account of the sons of perdition it should lose the glory and title of universal redemption, since it is prepared for all and all are ealled to it. From all which it appears, that Christ is rightly called the Redeemer and Saviour of the world, because he has brought to the whole human race a remedy applicable to the procuring. of the salvation of every individual.
[BODY] <!--v2p370-371-->6. If it was the counsel and will of God, that Christ by dying should pay to Him a most full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction, not only to deliver those who believe in the benefit of God, and thus eventually are saved, but also for those who continue in unbelief through their own fault, and thus eventually are condemned, then it must be confessed that this death of Christ is a remedy from the nature of the thing, and the ordination of God, applicable to all: But such was the counsel and will of God; which is evinced from the Divine promises, which make known his will to us. For God has promised salvation, under the condition of faith and repentance, even to those who would never perform those conditions. . Thus remission is promised to Cain, if he should repent. Gen. iv. 7. Which salvation, or remission of sins, conditionally promised to such a person, clearly proves that a cause of salvation was procured and applicable to the same person, under the aforesaid condition. The same is evinced in that God in the work of redemption hath so ordered his counsel that no man can truly complain that he perished through a defect in the expiatory sacrifice. But he to whom the death of Christ is not applicable for salvation as a remedy according to the will of God, may not less truly affirm that a sacrifice was wanting for him, than for the wicked angels, for whom under no condition is the death of Christ ordained. And this is that counsel which the Pharisees are said to have despised. Luke vii. 30.
[BODY] <!--v2p371-372-->7. If according to the order and nature of the things themselves, and our consideration of them, the death and merit of Christ is to be assumed as a thing ordained and destined by God for the good of the human race before it can be understood for whom faith was destined, then it is necessary to consider it as a cause of salvation applicable to all before it be determined that it is applied or infallibly to be applied to this or that person. "The argument of the consequence is this, That it is understood that the death or merit of Christ is not applied, nor to be applied to any one, until it is presupposed that faith is granted or to be granted to him. And on the contrary, the death of Christ is considered to be applicable to any one, before it is conceived that faith is denied or to be denied to him for ever. Now 1 add the minor, namely, that the death or merit of Christ, in his infinite mercy, ought to be considered as a thing determined on and destined for men before faith is destined for any individual persons. Which appears, in the first place, because the death or merit of Christ is the object of faith. But to what purpose would have been the gift of faith to Peter or Paul, unless a saving remedy had first been ordained applicable to any one through faith? Further, faith, like all other saving gifts, is conferred upon men on account of Christ and through his merit; therefore, in the order of the Divine decrees, the death of Christ precedes the faith of every Christian. To this those words of the Divines of the Palatinate refer, in their judgment exhibited at the Synod of Dort (Art. Synod. Dordrecht. page 88), The faith of the elect does not precede, but follows the death of Christ, because his death is the cause of faith, on account of which the elect are given to Christ, and the object of faith, which it beholds and embraces. Finally, it is decreed, that through the death of the second Adam, salvation is procurable for all men who are lost in the first Adam, before it is decreed to whom it may be given effectually and infallibly, and to whom it may not be given. It is to be confessed, therefore, that the Mediator Jesus Christ, with his death and the infinite treasure of his merits, is, from the ordination of God, applicable for salvation to the whole human race, although the most free, most just, most secret good pleasure of God intervenes, according to which he determines that faith (through means of which application is made) should be infallibly given to certain persons and not given to others. But why, in dispensing the treasure of the merits of Christ, which is sufficient for and applicable to all men individually, he acts so unequally with persons in equal circumstances, we ought not to inquire, since we cannot ascertain, but with the Apostle acquiesce in the secret will of God, He hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth. Romans ix. 18. No one hath first given to him, that it should be recompensed unto him again. Romans xi. 35.
[BODY] <!--v2p373-374-->8. The last argument is taken from a comparison of the twofold covenant, and according to it, of a twofold ordination of men to salvation. As, therefore, in the covenant of nature, that is, the agreement with Adam at the time of creation, salvation was procurable by Adam and all his posterity under the condition of obedience to be paid to the law of nature, and to the express commandment of God; so in the covenant of grace, which was confirmed by the blood of the Mediator, salvation is also understood to be procurable for all men under the condition published in the Gospel, that is, of faith in this Mediator, who hath made satisfaction for the sins of the human race. Moreover, as in the first covenant, God, who ordained salvation as procurable for Adam and his posterity, yet did not predestinate that either Adam himself or any of his posterity should be really saved by that covenant; so God, who in the second covenant ordained salvation as procurable for all under the condition of faith, yet hath not predestinated to give to all men individually this faith, by which they might infallibly obtain salvation. But lest the blood of the Son of God should flow, and through the fault of the human will the same should happen in the second covenant which had happened in the first, namely, that no one should enjoy the benefit of it, God resolved with himself a more deep and secret counsel, and determined of his mere and special mercy to give to some persons the ability and will to fulfil the aforesaid condition of faith, and further, that they should actually and infallibly fulfil it. But now, as he would be unjust towards God who should deny that salvation was ordained by God as procurable for Adam and his posterity under the covenant of nature; so he is more unjust towards Christ, who denies that his death was ordained by God, as a remedy for salvation applicable to all under the condition of the new covenant, although many do not obtain salvation by means of it. God himself gave to the world this remedy applicable to all mankind individually ; let the world concede to God the liberty of applying it, as it may seem good to his wisdom and justice. Those who think in this manner of the death of Christ do not take away that common loving-kindness of God, of which the Scripture testifies ; and yet at the same time they contend, that as many as are saved by the merit of the death of Christ, are saved by special and undeserved grace; and that as many as are not saved, perish through their own unbelief, or at least, through their own fault. I omit bringing forward any more arguments to corroborate this our opinion. Let us now attend to what is wont to be objected on the other side.
[H1] 3|CHAPTER III
[H2] ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS
[BODY] <!--v2p375-376-->Before we explain those things which may be objected on the other side, it should be premised, that we do not undertake the cause of those who declare that Christ by his death obtained remission of sins, reconciliation with God, and a state of salvation for each and every man. Thus Borreus* seems to think with Arminiust (Reply of Armin. to Artie. 13, 14), who, leaning on this foundation, asserts, that all infants of all nations dying without actual sins, are saved, because God hath taken the whole human race into the grace of reconciliation. He thinks therefore that by the sacrifice of the death of Christ the whole human race was placed in a state of salvation, from which if they should not fall, they will undoubtedly obtain salvation. Many persons ascribe the same error to Huberus and Puccius. But our defence is, not indeed that by this death of Christ salvation is actually obtained for all mankind, or that by its benefit each and every man is received into favour, and placed in such a state as, if he should continue in it, he would possess eternal life: But that this death of Christ is, according to the determination of the Divine will, a remedy applicable for salvation to the whole human race, or to every individual of the human race, although in procuring and effecting its application, God in an especial manner has compassion on some, and not on others. You have heard this sentiment in some measure confirmed by arguments. We will now vindicate it from the objections which may be brought against it on the other side.
[BODY] <!--v2p376-->Objection l. First, therefore, it may be objected, That at the time when Christ suffered death, many had been adjudged to hell, and tormented there, but there is no redemption from hell: How then can we contend that the death of Christ was ever applicable in any way to these condemned persons? Some, influenced by this argument, have concluded that the innumerable multitude of the wicked, who lived from the beginning of the world until the coming of Christ, and who, on account of their impiety, were cast into hell, had no more right in the benefit of redemption, before the sacrifice of Christ was offered up on the cross, than the devils themselves. Thus the Leyden Fathers speak in a writing which is extant in Vol. 9. Biblioth. Patrum, As the Lord Jesus Christ 1s by no means said to have suffered for the wicked and condemned angels, so it is not to be believed that he suffered all things for those impious and condemned men.
[BODY] <!--v2p376-378-->REPLY 1. But [ answer, When we affirm the death of Christ according to the ordination of God, and the nature of the thing, to be a remedy applicable to every man, we consider not merely the outward passion of Christ endured at the appointed moment of time, but the eternal virtue of the death of Christ, bringing salvation to mankind in every age. For Christ, as to the intention of God, was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and the efficacy of this propitiatory sacrifice could extend itself as much to those who lived before Christ suffered, as to us who live after his passion. If therefore they only mean, that those could not be relieved by the death of Christ in time, who before his death were by an irrevocable decree adjudged to infernal punishment, we confess the same ; because they had then ceased to be living in this world, and therefore were not capable of repentance and faith; but if they mean to contend further, that the eternal virtue of the death of Christ was not applicable to such persons while they were alive in this world, because the passion of Christ did not regard them any more than the wicked and condemned angels, that we deny. For it may be truly said of Cain, Esau, or any man who died before Christ suffered, that he might have been absolved from his sins, and saved through the virtue of the sacrifice to be offered up by the Messiah, if he had believed in him; which cannot be said of the condemned angels: because the universal covenant of salvation under the condition of faith, embraces the whole human race, but does not embrace the fallen angels. It is therefore worthy of observation, that God would not that the death of his Christ should either be applied or applicable under any condition to any of the fallen angels: to all these, therefore, God conducted himself alike and equally. But not equally to mankind; for as to these, although he determined and declared that the death of his Son was applicable to any one under the condition of faith, yet he did not determine to cause it by the benefit of his special mercy to be applied equally to every one. We do not deny therefore what is evident, namely, that the differeuce between devils and men consists in this, that from the ordination of God, the death of Christ is a thing ordained for and applicable to mankind ; but neither ordained for, nor applicable to devils; although after this life, to men placed in hell there is no further possibility of application remaining. Therefore this consequence is faulty; viz. T'he death of Christ was not applicable to the damned after their condemnation ; Therefore it was never and in no way applicable to them.
[BODY] <!--v2p378-->OBJECTION 2. Those who say that the death of Christ is applicable, from the ordination of God, to every individual, at the same time affirm, that God has provided for many persons a remedy, which he foresaw would never profit them. For God knew that none of the reprobate would be healed by the medicine of the blood of Christ, and delivered from eternal death. To what purpose therefore would he ordain so precious a remedy to be applicable even to those to whom it was most certain that it would never be applied ?
[BODY] <!--v2p378-379-->REPLY 2. You cannot on that account infer, that it rightly follows from our opinion, that this remedy, even by the ordination and appointment of God himself, is applicable to innumerable persons to whom it will never be actually applied. I deny, therefore, that any thing false or inconvenient can be deduced from thence, although this be granted. Yea, it is evident, that many benefits have been provided by God for angels and men, I may also add, and conferred sometimes, and duly ordained to a certain end, which God at the same time knew would never profit them, nor avail to produce such an end. Those excellent gifts, which were conferred upon the apostate angels in their first creation, were duly ordained by God to produce in them firm and constant obedience, and to secure their blessedness; yet God knew that they would be rebellious, and would never use those gifts to the obtaining of that good for which they were destined. The same may be said of Adam in his state of uprightness, whom God endued with knowledge and holiness, and guarded with admonitions abundantly sufficient to preserve him in his duty ; knowing at the same time that all these things, which were applicable to the promotion of his obedience and felicity, would never be applied. It is not therefore foreign to Divine wisdom to appoint and ordain means applicable to a certain end, although he may understand that the application would be hindered by some intervening obstacle, which he had not determined to remove. Here may be adduced that question of Aquinas on predestination, where he makes a difference between providence commonly taken, and predestination, which is a special part of providence. Providence, he says, respects only an order to an end: predestination respects the end or event of an order. Those things which are ordained to an end by that more common providence, do not always obtain the end; but those things which are ordained by an individual predestination always obtain it. As therefore God, by that more extensive providence, is understood to have provided many bodily remedies applicable to the removing of certain bodily diseases from any persons, which nevertheless he hath not determined to be infallibly applied to any particular individuals; so also we affirm that God of his love to man, and that more common providence, hath provided and ordained the blood of his Son as a remedy applicable to the expiation of the sins of mankind in general, although he hath not determined from his individual predestination to have it applied to all men individually. But for what purpose is that ordained as applicable to all men, which is not intended to be infallibly applied to all? I answer, that from hence the good-will, mercy, and justice of God may appear more conspicuous, whilst that remedy which, from the ordination of God, is applicable to every one for salvation, is applied nevertheless only to certain persons, to whom God shews his compassion in a special manner; it is not applied to others, although God promises it and sets it before them, through their own wickedness.
[BODY] <!--v2p379-380-->OBJECTION 3. If the death of Christ, by the ordination of God, is a remedy applicable to all for salvation, then God would take care that this death of Christ should be announced to all, lest any one might pretend that he perished only through ignorance of so efficacious a remedy. But experience teaches, that this remedy was not revealed, for some ages, not only to many individuals, but also to many nations: Therefore that was not appointed by God to be a remedy applicable to all men individually, which was concealed from so many, God himself so ordering it.
[BODY] <!--v2p380-381-->REPLY 3. We willingly concede what relates to the minor proposition; which also the sacred Scriptures testify, and the Fathers acknowledge to be most true. In Acts xiv. 16, Paul shews, that in times past God suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, without any knowledge of Christ. And on this account, in Colossians i. 26, 27, he calls the Gospel of Christ, the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints, to whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles. Hence Prosper says On free-will; Jt ?s not removed from common observation in how many ages what an innumerable multitude of men have died in their errors and impieties, without any knowledge of the true God. And, On the calling of the Gentiles (lib. i. cap 7), In the extreme parts of the world there are some nations, on whom the grace of the Saviour hath not, yet shone. The minor proposition, therefore, being granted, we say that the consequence of the major is invalid. For God is not bound to procure the application of his remedy to any individual to whom he hath willed that it should be applicable ; which is evident as well in corporeal as in spiritual remedies. Although, therefore, the death of Christ is, from the ordination of God, and the nature of the thing, a remedy of that kind, that it may be both announced and applied to every individual of the human race for the remission of sins, yet God is not bound by any promise to procure that it should be announced and actually applied to every individual. God willed that the death of his Son should be a treasure as it were deposited in his own hands, from whence he might dispense to the whole human race whatsoever regards the obtaining either of pardon, or grace, or glory : but he willed also that the actual communication of this treasure should remain in his own most free power, and from thence he should bestow it upon inen according to the good pleasure of his own’ will. Js it not lawful for me to do what 1 will with mine own? Matt. xx. l9. We say, therefore, that the death and merit of Christ is, according to the revealed will of God, applicable to all men; and in this sense, that Christ died for all men, but not for the apostate angels. But this being assumed, we affirm nevertheless that God, who has absolute authority over his own gift, is not bound to make known, nor to apply this medicine to all mankind. So Augustine says, Whom he will not relieve, he does not relieve ; of whom in his predestination, he hath otherwise determined, secretly indeed, but justly. For there is no iniquity with God, but his judgments are inscrutable. Nor yet (as it was objected) will any one perish through ignorance alone of the remedy. For in all that perish there will be found causes why they perish, arising from their own demerits, their aforesaid ignorance accompanying only, not causing, their perdition. Thou hast destroyed thyself, &c.
[BODY] <!--v2p381-->OBJECTION 4. If the death of Christ is to be considered as a remedy or ransom applicable to every man, from the ordination of God, then also the resurrection, intercession, and mediation of Christ will have respect to all men in the same manner. But Christ was not raised up for all men, does not intercede for all, is not the mediator of all: Therefore, neither is his death to be extended to all. That these are never to be separated is proved from Romans viii. 34, where they are all joined together. It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. And Romans iv. 25, the Apostle teaches, that those for whose offences Christ died, for their justification he was raised again. But he was not raised again for all men; Therefore, neither did he die for all.
[BODY] <!--v2p381-383-->REPLY 4. If the ground of our defence be rightly weighed, it will easily appear that all these things are no detriment to our cause. For we do not contend that the death of Christ was, from the ordination of God, so applicable to each and every man, that on account of this propitiatory sacrifice, all men are at once placed in a state of grace and salvation; nor do we defend this, that from the special decree of God and of predestination, this death of Christ is infallibly to be applied to each and every man; but that this death of Christ, God so ordaining it and rerevealing it in his word, is that ransom by which the sins of any man may be expiated who performs the conditions : required in the Gospel. And hence it is that the preacher of the Gospel may confidently announce to every man in every part of the world, that salvation is procurable for him in the death of the Son of God, if he should believe. This cannot be promised to any of the fallen angels. Whence it is clear, that this conditional promise of salvation in the death of Christ, which may be announced to every man is founded on some ordination of the will of God, which regards men universally and individually, and does not regard angels. But let the opponents say what this ordination is, if it is not that which we assert concerning the death of Christ being applicable to the human : race under the conditions of the Gospel. These things being so determined, we come nearer to the solution of the aforesaid objection, that the death of Christ pertains to all men individually, as to his death itself, or the oblation made on the cross. For as we can truly announce to every man that his sins are expiable by the death of Christ according to the ordination of God, and will be expiated, if only he should believe in Christ; so also we can truly declare, that the same Christ was raised again, that he might justify him through faith, and was exalted at the right hand of God, that, by his mediation and merits, he might preserve him through faith in the favour of God, and at length might lead him to glory. Therefore we do not put asunder those things which God hath joined together ; but we teach, that the death, resurrection; and intercession of Christ are joined together in indissoluble union, but in a different way. If we consider the whole human race, that is, each and every man, then we say, not only that the death, but the resurrection and intercession of Christ regards them, as to the possibility of their enjoying these benefits, the condition of faith being pre-supposed. If we consider the elect, we affirm that all these things regard them as to the infallibility of enjoying them, because of this condition of faith being destined for, and in time bostowed uponthem. Although, therefore, in some special way, the death and resurrection of Christ, with the great treasure of his merits, may be restricted to the elect alone (of which we shall discourse afterwards), yet it is not to be denied that the death and merits of Christ, who took the one nature of all, and undertook the one cause of all, are of that kind, that they may be announced, offered, and by faith applied to every individual partaker of human nature. This Christ himself hath indicated in a manner sufficiently clear, in those words, John iii. 17, 18, God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved ; he that believeth on him is not condemned ; but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Those, therefore, who never believe, nor will believe, would nevertheless have had life procurable through the death and merits of Christ, according to the ordination of God, if they had believed.
[BODY] <!--v2p383-->OBJECTION 5. If the death of Christ be a benefit from the ordination of God, applicable to each and every man, then it may be said, that Christ made satisfaction for the sins of the whole human race. But this cannot be defended, without at the same time overthrowing the justice of God, since the idea of justice does not admit that the same sin should be punished twice. Suppose, then, that the death of Christ is a ransom, by which satisfaction was made to God for the sins of the human race, how can so many persons be called to account for the same by the justice of God, and be tormented with eternal punishment?
[BODY] <!--v2p383-386-->REPLY 5. Asto the major proposition, we think its consequence may be safely conceded. For the orthodox Fathers boldly assert that Christ made satisfaction for the sins of the human race or of all mankind. Thus Eusebius, (Evang. Demonstr. lib. x. in the preface) 77 was needful that . the Lamb of God should be offered as a sacrifice for the other lambs whose nature he assumed, even for the whole human race. Thus Nazianzen (Orat. 2. in Pasch.) The sacrifice of Christ is an imperishable expiation of the whole world. Thus, finally (omitting others), Cyril (Catech. 13.), He redeemed the whole world of mankind. The same form of speaking is every where made use of in the Articles of religion of our Church of England, (Art. 2, 15, 31, &c.) Thus also those speak who endeavour to limit to the utmost this death of Christ. We adduced before the testimony of the Reverend Heidelberg Divine Pareus, who freely confesses in his judgment exhibited at the Synod of Dort, The cause and matter of the passion of Christ was a feeling or sustaining of the wrath of God, incensed by the sin, not of some men, but of the whole human race. A little afterwards, The whole of sin and of the wrath of God against it, is affirmed to have been borne by Christ. Nor ought this to appear unsound, since this universal redemption, satisfaction, or expiation performed by the death of Christ, brings nothing more than àn universal cause of salvation to be confirmed and granted to the human race by the Divine ordination; the benefit of which every individual may enjoy through the faith required by the Gospel. We therefore call Christ the Redeemer of the world, and teach that he made satisfaction for the sins not of some, but of the whole world, not because that on account of the payment of this price for the sins of the human race, all mankind individually are to be immediately delivered from captivity and death, but because by virtue of the payment of this price, all men individually may and ought to be delivered from death, and, in fact, are to be delivered according to the tenor of the evangelical covenant, that is, if they repent and believe in this Redeemer. To what is further urged, That it is contrary to justice to receive satisfaction or a ransom for the sins of the whole human race, and yet not to deliver them all from the punishment of their sins, but, notwithstanding this satisfaction, to adjudge many to eternal torments ; I answer, That this would indeed be most unjust, if we of ourselves had paid this price to God, or if our Surety, Jesus Christ, had so offered.to God his blood as a satisfactory price, that without any other intervening condition, all men should be immediately absolved through the offering of the oblation made by him; or, finally, if God himself had covenanted with Christ when he died, that he would give faith to every individual, and all those other things which regard the infallible application of this sacrifice which was offered up for the human race. But since God himself of his own accord provided that this price should be paid to himself, it was in his own power to annex conditions, which being performed, this death should be advantageous to any man, not being performed it should not profit any man. Therefore no injustice is done to those persons who are punished by God after the ransom was accepted for the sins of the human race, because they offered nothing to God as a satisfaction for their sins, nor performed that condition, without the performance of which God willed not that this satisfactory price should benefit any individual. Nor, moreover, ought this to be thought an injustice to Christ the Mediator. For he so was willing to die for all, and to pay to the Father the price of redemption for all, that at the same time he willed not that every individualin any way whatsoever, but that all, as soon as they believed in him, should be absolved from the guilt of their sins. — Lastly, Christ, in offering himself in sacrifice to God the Father in order to expiate the sins of the world, nevertheless subinitted to the good pleasure of the Father the free distribution and application of his merits, neither was any agreement entered into between the Father and the Son, by which God is bound to effect that this death of Christ, which, from the ordination of God, is applicable to all under the condition of faith, should become applied to all by the gift of faith. We ought not, therefore, to deny that the offering of Christ once made is a perfect satisfaction for the sins, not of some men only, but of all; yet so that he who is simply said to have died for all, promises remission of sin through his death and salvation conditionally, and will perform it to those alone who believe. We will illustrate all these things by a similitude ; Suppose that a number of men were cast into prison by a certain King on account of a great debt, or that they were condemned to suffer death for high treason; but that the King himself procured that his own Son should discharge this debt to the last farthing ; or should substitute himself as guilty in the room of those traitors, and should suffer the punishment due to them all, this condition being at the same time promulgated both by the King and his Son, That none should be absolved or liberated except those only who should acknowledge the King’s Son for their Lord and serve him: These things being so determined, I enquire, if those who persist in disobedience and rebellion against the King’s Son should not be delivered, would any charge of injustice be incurred, because after this ransom had been paid, their own debts should be exacted from many, or after the punishment endured by the Son, these rebels should nevertheless be punished? By no means; because the payment of the just price, and the enduring of the punishment was ordained to procure remission for every one under the condition of obedience, and not otherwise. I shall add no more; it will be easy to accommodate all these thines to our present purpose.
[BODY] <!--v2p386-->OBJECTION 6. No medium can be found or thought of between the sufficiency of the price, and its real application; those, therefore, who deny that the real application of the death of Christ is made to all, ought not to proceed further than to assert the sufficiency of this price for all; beyond which they are necessarily compelled to concede its real application to all. But those who declare this death of Christ to be, according to the ordination of God, applicable to all for salvation, seem to introduce some medium between the sufficient value and the actual efficacy of it. But of what kind will it be, or where will it be found? It cannot be any efficiency indifferently regarding all men individually, and caused in them by the death of Christ, because such an effect cannot be assigned. Nor can we by virtue of the death of Christ, place in God himself either any obtaining of remission of sins extended to all, or any intention of its application. It remains, therefore, that we assert, that beyond the sufficiency of the price, nothing redounds to the death of Christ which has regard to all men.
[BODY] <!--v2p386-388-->REPLY 6. To meet this objection, we should observe, in the first place, what kind of sufficiency they mean who reason thus, and at the same time retain the distinction of the Schoolmen, that Christ died for all men sufficiently, for the elect effectually. Therefore, that Christ died for all men sufficiently, they understand thus: The death of Christ is sufficient to redeem all men, but he would not die for all: The death of Christ is in itself, and in its intrinsic value, a sufficient ransom for all, but it was not paid for all. But it never occurred to the Schoolmen to defend this sufficiency only, and to deny absolutely that Christ died for all. Nor can it easily be explained how, without evident contradiction, it can be affirmed, that Christ died or was offered up sufficiently for all, and at the same time be altogether denied that he was unwilling to die or be offered up for many. As to those, therefore, who admit such an oblation and sufficiency in the death of Christ as is merely hypothetical, if it is referred to all, I answer, That a medium can and ought to be assigned between that mere sufficiency of price and its real application. For the ordination of God manifested in the Gospel, according to which this death of Christ is proposed to be received by every one that repents and believes, proves that this sufficiency and actual application is appointed as a kind of medium. For in this ordination of God, according to which the death of Christ is appointed and proposed as a cause of salvation to every living person, applicable by faith, there is contained less than in the real application, but there is contained something more than in the mere and bare sufficiency of the thing considered in itself, this conditional ordination being excluded, which regards every partaker of human nature. This, therefore, is that very medium which the adversaries deny can be assigned, but still urge and enquire, what that medium is, and where it is to be found, which goes beyond the bare sufficiency, and yet does not attain to the real application. I answer, That there is not any act, caused by the death of Christ, indifferently regarding every individual; but there is a title to eternal life, founded on the death of Christ, indifferently regarding every individual under the condition of faith : That there is not in God an obtaining of remission, and a design of application extended to all men individually according to the infallible order of predestination ; but there is in God a certain obligation to remission, and a will of remitting sins and conferring life extended to all men individually, according to the tenor of the promise of the Gospel. But I say no more on this subject at present, because when we come to our next proposition, we shall designedly discourse of this same point more copiously.
[BODY] <!--v2p388-->OBJECTION 7. The will of the Father, the oblation of the Son, the saving operation of the Holy Spirit, equally extend to and respect the same persons: But it is the will of the Father to save the elect alone: and the Spirit, by giving faith and perseverance, actually saves the elect alone: Therefore the death or oblation of Christ is not to be extended except to the elect alone; and therefore it. ought not to be considered as a remedy from the ordination of God applicable to each and every man.
[BODY] <!--v2p388-389-->REPLY 7. If the major proposition is understood concerning the will of God in predestinating, which is always joined with the infallibility of the event; and concerning that special operation of the sanctifying Spirit, which is subservient to the execution of this decree; I say that it is not absolutely true: for the death or oblation of Christ regards in some way certain persons whom predestination does not embrace. Predestination is the secret decree of God by which he determined with himself from eternity to whom he would infallibly give efficacious grace and eternal life through the infinite merit of the death of Christ: But the oblation of Christ on the cross is a common benefit granted to the human race, by virtue of which any one who only embraces it with a true faith, may claim for himself eternal life according to the will of God revealed in the Gospel. So Christ himself speaks, John iii. 14, 15, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. Although, therefore, the predestination of God, and effectual vocation, which depends upon it, embraces no one not elected, yet, as the offering of Christ in the Gospel, so also the oblation of Christ on the cross, is of wider extent, and is as far applicable as it is announceable, and will bring salvation to every one provided he believes it. At the same time we leave to God his own secret will, according to which he hath mercifully determined to work effectually in some that they may believe, and to leave others to their inherent obduracy, and not to work effectually in them that they may believe. I add further, That there was in Christ himself a will according to which he willed that his death should regard all men individually; and there was also a will according to which he willed that it should pertain to the elect alone. He willed that it should regard all the posterity of Adam who should be saved, and that it should actually save them all, provided they should embrace it with a true faith. He willed that it should so pertain to the elect alone, that by the merit of it all things which relate to the obtaining of salvation, should be infallibly given to them. And in this sense we confess that the oblation of Christ is of the same extent as the predestination of God. Of which more will be said hereafter.
[BODY] <!--v2p389-->OBJECTION 8. If the death of Christ is determined to be applicable to each and every man according to the ordination of God, then all discrimination between the elect and non-elect is removed, and the doctrine of predestination is altogether overturned: For if Christ may be said in any sense whatever to have died for all, what hinders us from declaring in the same sense that all men individually are elected by God ?
[BODY] <!--v2p389-391-->REPLY 8. These objections proceed from ignorance of the true reason of election or predestination. For it is not any kind of ordination to salvation, through whatever means, which places man in the number of the elect or predestinated, but an ordination through such means as God both knew and decreed would infallibly produce the effect of salvation in the elect person. Hence is that definition of predestination by Augustine (on Perseverance, cap. 14) It is a foreknowledge and preparation of the benefits of God, by which those who are delivered are most certainly delivered, Hence also that apostolical chain, Romans viii. 29, 30, in which predestination is united in an inseparable bond with glorification, Whom he did predestinate, them he also glorified. Therefore, although we confess that the death of Christ was in some way ordained by God for a common remedy of the human race, and would benefit all under this Evangelical condition—if they should believe it, yet it does not follow hence that all men individually are promiscuously elected ; because God hath not determined to give to all men individually that grace whereby they may believe, and, by believing, may infallibly derive life from this death of Christ. And it may further be added, that although we should grant not only that Christ died for all men, but also that on account of this death of Christ sufficient grace was prepared and given by God to every individual (which we do not hold), yet no one from these concessions could rightly infer that all men are promiscuously elected, or that there is no difference between the elect and those who are passed by. The reason is evident; Because there is no sufficient ordination of means to procure the salvation of man, were he predestinated, unless it should be added, that there is an infallible order of special providence appointing and directing the ordained means to a most certain attainment of the end, which nothing can prevent. This may be illustrated by the example of angels and men considered in a state of upright nature. All the angels individually when formed were furnished with sufficient grace, and thence sufficiently endowed to obtain blessedness. But this does not prove either that there was no election among the angels, or that they were all indiscriminately elected. Thus Adam himself, at his creation, and in him all his posterity, are understood to have been supplied with sufficient grace and duly furnished to obtain eternallife: but neither will it follow from thence that all men were elected, or that there was no predestination. For not every ordination to the obtaining of eternal life either at once makes a man elected, or denies that he is not elected, but only (as was before said) infallible ordination. That we may return therefore to our argument: From the death of Christ, ordained to be a propitiatory sacrifice for all men individually, and applicable through faith for the obtaining of remission and salvation, it does not follow that election and preterition is taken away ; because this common ordination which is revealed in the Gospel being granted, there is also a certain secret ordination, according to which the aforesaid death of Christ is decreed to be infallibly applied to some persons, to whom God will manifest his special compassion ; it is not decreed to be so applied to others, upon whom God will not have compassion in the same manner. And this is abundantly sufficient to defend the doctrine of predestination and reprobation, although we extend the death of Christ to all men in the aforesaid sense.
[BODY] <!--v2p391-->OBJECTION 9. Some dispute, by means of an argument deduced, as they think, from similar circumstances, in this manner: It is as foreign from truth that Christ died according to the ordination of God, for some who are not saved, as that some are saved for whom, according to the ordination of God, he did not die: But this it would be absurd to assert : so likewise the former.
[BODY] <!--v2p391-392-->REPLY 9. I deny that the reasoning is similar on both sides. For (as it is a received maxim in Divinity) Good arises only from pure sources, evil from any kind of defect : The salvation of mankind therefore, which is the greatest good, is not produced without a full concurrence of all causes; but the loss of salvation, which is an evil, may happen from the defect of any one cause ordained for the salvation of mankind. Although it is impossible that any persons can be saved for whom Christ did not die, because the death of Christ is one of those ordained causes which operate to the salvation of mankind; yet it is not impossible to cut off some from salvation for whom he did die, because it was not appointed by God that the death of Christ alone, by the act of his oblation, should render God propitious to all, and should save all, but that it should be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, (Romans iii. 25), and it is unto all and upon all them that believe; for there is no difference, as it is said in the 22d verse. But if any one should still urge, Why is the death of Christ declared to be given for a remedy to all men, but faith is not said to be given or prepared for all? I answer, Because the Scriptures clearly teach, that Christ by dying obtained for each and every man this grace, that, under the condition of faith, they might now hope for and obtain remission of sins and salvation: but this conditional grace could not be offered to all, nor could regard all in every way, unless this death of Christ should pertain to all men from the ordination of God himself. Now, on the other hand, we do not maintain that faith is destined for or given to all, because the same holy Scripture, which proposes the death of Christ as a benefit vouchsafed to all and applicable to every one through faith, does not make this faith a benefit promised or given to all, but derived from the peculiar decree of election. In addition to these’ things, the Mediator himself, who offered himself for a sacrifice to God to expiate the sins of the world, (Acts iii. 19 et seq.) obtained from God that all those individuals who should believe in him, should be absolved from their sins, and so far was willing to pay this ransom for all: but he did not apply to all the merit of his death, nor obtained from God that all should infallibly partake of faith and salvation. And here the secret of election discovers itself, which ought not to overturn or weaken the universality of the oblation, or the truth of the promise of the Gospel.
[BODY] <!--v2p392-393-->OBJECTION 10. If the death of Christ were to be conceived by us as a remedy applicable to all men, then the holy Scriptures would not restrain the actual giving of the Son to those only who believe; but they apply to the faithful alone not only the benefit or real application, but also the very gift of the Son, John iii. 15, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. That which is given to mankind conditionally, is understood to be given to no one, if the condition be set aside. Since, therefore, this condition of believing is fulfilled by the elect alone, the consequence is, that we should say, that Christ was offered for them alone. And therefore this oblation or death of Christ is not a remedy or ransom applicable, according to the ordination of God, to each and every man.
[BODY] <!--v2p393-395-->REPLY 10. We may consider the giving or oblation of Christ in a twofold point of view. The first is that in which he is understood to have been given or offered to God the Father on the altar of the cross, to take away the sins of the world: of which the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ii. 5, 6, There is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus ; who gave himself a ransom for all, namely, to God the Father, as it is more clearly expressed Ephes. v. 2, Christ hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour. This oblation is the foundation of every future offering, by which he is offered to men in the Gospel, that, being apprehended by faith, he may bestow upon them eternal life through the merit of this sacrifice. Of this oblation the same Apostle speaks, Romans iii. 24, 25, We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, &c. If we regard the former oblation, I deny that Christ offered himself a sacrifice, or gave himself a ransom to God the Father to expiate the sins of the world, under the condition of human faith, as it were in this form, J offer myself to Thee as a sa- : crifice for the sins of the human race, provided they believe in me. For he offered himself simply, not conditionally, to God the Father; which is proved from hence, that the Father, according to whose will the Son offered himself a sacrifice, did not determine with himself to give a Redeemer to the world under this hypothesis, If the world should believe ; but God gave his Son to the world, and the Son gave himself to the Father a ransom to take away the sins of the world, gratuitously and absolutely. A condition indeed is annexed in the preaching of the Gospel, not to the giving, but to the eternal life which is to follow from the beneficial application of the thing given. Therefore, as to what regards the latter oblation, by which Christ, who was offered up to God for men, is now offered to men in the Gospel, I deny also that this hypothetical and conditional oblation or giving of Christ, is even to be thought of from this preaching of the Gospel. For the Saviour in the place above-mentioned did not say, So God loved the world, that he would give his Son for it if it should believe: but after that he had declared that he was given absolutely to all from the love of God to man, he shews nevertheless that it would not profit all to eternal life absolutely and simply, but conditionally, even all if they should believe, or all who should believe. We also, if at any time we should preach the Gospel to unbelievers, as to the Indians or Americans, should not begin to inform them, Christ the Son of God died for some of you who shall believe in him, and not for others, but we should say, Christ died to take away the sins of the whole world, and gave him- : self a ransom to God the Father, but in such a manner, that neither Christ who offered up himself as the price of redemption for all, nor God the Father to whom he was offered, wills that any of you should be delivered from their sins, before you believe in God and in Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. To that, therefore, which is urged in the last place, That what is understood to be given or promised under the condition of faith, is supposed not to be given or promised to any one, without the performance of this condition ; and therefore Christ is truly af- Jirmed to be given only for the elect, who perform the condition, I answer, We no where read in the Scriptures, that Christ, or the death or sacrifice of Christ, was given or promised conditionally to the human race, although salvation or eternal life is every where promised to be given under the condition of faith. Wherefore it may also be added, That even a thing which is promised conditionally, has respect in some way to those who never fulfil the condition, namely, as to the right of claiming the promised benefit, if they should fulfil it ; which Christ himself seems to imply, John iii. 18, where he teaches that unbelievers are condemned, because they did not believe in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Therefore even those who believed not had the death of the Son of God applicable to themselves, although they had it not applied, because they believed not. And on this account the elect alone find life in the death of Christ, because they alone believe in God, who has compassion upon them.
[BODY] <!--v2p395-->OpsectTion 1]. The death of Christ is not applicable to those for whom he did not die, or was not offered up. But there are numberless persons for whom he did not die, or was not offered up, namely, all those who were not written in the book of life of the elect, before the foundation of the world. From thence they endeavour to confirm the minor, that the Apostle broadly asserts that God would freely give all things to those for whom the Son died, Romans viii. 32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give usallthings? Buthe does not freely give all things to all men: Therefore Christ did not die for all: Therefore his death is not applicable to all.
[BODY] <!--v2p395-396-->Reply ll. I willingly grant that the death of Christ can in no true sense be said to be applicable to those for whom God did in no wise will that he should die. For the death of Christ is not a remedy applicable to expiate the sins of any one, except according to the ordination and acceptation of God. And for this reason, although the ransom paid by Christ to God the Father is in itself of sufficient and superabundant value to take away the sins, not only of men, but of fallen angels, yet, on account of the want of its ordination and acceptation as to angels, we deny that Christ ought to be said to have died for them in any way. The same thing might also be declared respecting men, if there were any alienated and excluded from all possibility of the aforesaid redemption on account of the same want of Divine ordination and acceptation. But as it was said, the major being granted, let us proceed to the minor. I answer therefore, That there is no one who isa partaker of the same human nature which the Redeemer deigned to assume, for whom Christ did not deliver up himself as a price of redemption, applicable according to. the ordination and acceptation of God, for remission of sins, to be obtained by faith in his blood. Nor does the Apostle contradict us, whose whole discourse in Romans vill. is not designed to console any description of persons in any-condition, but the elect; nor the elect merely as such, but the elect now called, justified, sanctified, that is, as he says Coloss. i. 13, now delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of his dear Son. Nor does he simply and universally affirm that God freely gives all things to all men for whom Christ died, but to all of us to whom the present discourse relates, that is, to all the predestinated who are believing in Christ, for whom not only Christ died, but to whom moreover Christ is now given in an especial manner, that is, is united and communicated with the infinite treasure of his merits. Therefore this consolatory argument of the Apostle derived from the death of Christ is efficacious; but only if it is accommodated to those persons to whom it was accommodated by the Apostle, and only so far as it was accommodated by him, namely, in this manner, Thou, who from thy effectual calling, justification, and sanctification, canst now know and perceive that thou art predestinated, and that for thy special and effectual redemption, God willed not only that his Son should be offered up to himself, but also communicated to thee ; why canst thou not trust him with the rest, that he will freely give thee all other things necessary to accomplish thy salvation ? But if any one desires to apply the aforesaid reasoning to any persons whatsoever setting aside the consideration of predestination, calling, and justification, in this manner, Christ died for you, or Christ gave himself a ransom or sacrifice to God to expiate your sins, and therefore God will freely give you all things, I say, that he extends this argument beyond its limits, contrary to the mind of the Apostle, who confined it to certain persons, namely, the predestinated, and to them as placed in a certain condition, namely, of justification and adoption.
[BODY] <!--v2p396-->OBJECTION 12, Christ was ordained to be the Redeemer not from love to mankind in general, but from that special good will with which God embraced his own elect
[BODY] <!--v2p396-397-->SION. DN peculiarly to eternal life: Therefore, the death of Christ is not a ransom applicable from the ordination of God to the redemption of all men, but is destined for the elect alone.
[BODY] <!--v2p397-398-->REPLY 12. I deny the antecedent, and affirm that God in sending the Redeemer was willing to manifest to the world both these kinds of love; namely, that common love of the human race, which we call philanthropy, and that special and secret love, which we call good pleasure. The argument of common love is, that he would so far regard the human race, that is, all men individually, that they should have a Redeemer through whose satisfaction, apprehended by faith, they might obtain remission of sins. This love he did not exhibit to the fallen angels (whom, nevertheless, he preserves as his creatures), since Christ was in no wise ordained to be a Redeemer of them, nor is remission of sins through the satisfaction of a Redeemer either to be announced or applicable to them under any condition, From hence we clearly collect, that in the very appointment or ordination of a Redeemer, God had some regard of common love towards men, which he had not towards devils. Which will appear further if we rightly consider what this redemption is. It is, then, a payment of the just price due for us captives, not that we should be actually delivered on the payment of the price, but that we should be delivered as soon as we believe in the Redeemer. This is that ordination of the death of Christ, or of a satisfactory price, which flowed from the common love of God to all mankind, and therefore, it is rightly declared to be extended, under this condition, from us to all men individually. And to this we think that celebrated passage refers, John i. 16, God so loved the world, &c. But now as to what relates to that secret and more special love, with which God embraces the elect, far be it from us to deny that the death and merit of Christ is a special gift to be effectually and infallibly applied in a special way to the elect, who are to be redeemed and saved through his special love. Therefore we attribute to that common love, with which God waits upon the human race, that he was willing to appoint such a Redeemer, through whose death and satisfaction any one, provided he should believe in him, might be absolved from his sins, Acts xiii. 38. But we think that it is to be attributed to his special good pleasure, with which he embraces the elect alone, that from the death and merit of this appointed and ordained Redeemer, he should determine to give to certain individual persons effectually and infallibly, faith, remission of sins, and eternal life. And we think that the Saviour referred to this special intention, John x. 15, where he says, that he laid down his life for his sheep, that is, that he so offered himself up as a sacrifice for the elect, that through his death not only they might be saved, if they should believe, but that they might actually believe and be saved. We ought not, therefore, so to urge the special good pleasure of God towards the elect, that we should deny that the ransom of Christ was ordained by God to reconcile and deliver all mankind individually, and to be applied, provided they embrace it with a true faith; leaving at the same time to God his own secret judgments, and full liberty in dispensing or not dispensing that special grace, by means of which faith is infallibly produced in the hearts of men, and an effectual application is secured, and eternal life is infallibly obtained according to the covenant of the Gospel.
[BODY] <!--v2p398-399-->OBJECTION 13. If the death of Christ is, according to the ordination of God, applicable to all men for salvation, then the salvation of all would be effected by this death of Christ. For God always effects and follows up that end which he designs. If, therefore, he had ordained the death of Christ to procure the salvation of the human race, he would also have saved the whole human race by means of this death of Christ. Those, therefore, who assert that the death of Christ is, through the ordination of God himself, appointed to be a remedy applicable to all men for salvation, seem to impugn the wisdom of God, For he has very little wisdom who designs a thing which he does not accomplish. They seem also to impugn the omnipotence of God. For it is the act of a weak person to ordain a benefit or remedy applicable to every individual, which, nevertheless, on account of the wickedness or unbelief of men, he cannot apply to many of them.
[BODY] <!--v2p399-401-->REPLY 13. In order to remove these scruples it should be attentively noticed, that we defend this proposition only, That there is some kind of ordination or good pleasure of the Divine will, according to which the death of Christ is a satisfactory ransom in such a manner applicable for all men to the. obtaining of remission, that if they should submit themselves to this ordination and good pleasure, it would be actually applied to each and every man. But we do not assert or maintain the proposition, That there is any ordination, good pleasure, or decree of the Divine will, according to which he should absolutely intend or appoint to make this death of Christ to be effectually and infallibly applied to each and every man. The former ordination considered in itself is sufficient for the purpose, that the death of Christ may be truly said to be applicable to all men individually ; since the want of such an ordination is the reason why we cannot say that Christ died for the apostate angels, or that the death of Christ is not applicable to them in any degree. These things being premised, I affirm that the consequence of the major is invalid. For although the death of Christ, according to the ordination and will of God himself, is a remedy of such a kind that it may be applied to any individual of the human race for salvation, and the mode of its application is clearly laid down in the holy Scripture, namely, through the performance of the condition of faith; yet it cannot be inferred from thence, either that faith or salvation is infallibly to be conferred on all and each one; because it is a very different thing to ordain the death of Christ as a remedy applicable for salvation to all men, and to prescribe faith as the mode or condition by which it is applied ; and to appoint and absolutely to decree effectually to produce faith and salvation in certain persons. This latter, therefore, cannot be rightly deduced from the former. For as if God should create any herb endued with such a virtue that it might heal any one who labours under any disease whatever, and moreover should promise, that any one who should use it should undoubtedly recover his former health, any one would rightly conclude from thence, that this herb was a remedy for any disease, applicable, by the ordination of God, to all sick persons individually; but would not rightly infer that every individual would be infallibly cured by means of this remedy, because it would not be given to some that they should find this remedy, and others perhaps would not be willing to make use of it when it was found: So, because God sent the Redeemer into the world, and furnished him with so much virtue and grace that he might confer remission of sins and eternal life upon any man who labours under damnable guilt, and moreover promised in the Gospel, that any one who should believe in this Redeemer should be absolved from all his sins, any one may rightly conclude from this, that this Redeemer and his death are applicable to all sinners; but not rightly, that all sinners will be saved by his death, because to many this saving death of the Redeemer is not revealed, to many it is not given that they should believe in him, although he is made known to them. But that which is brought forward on the opposite side, That God always accomplishes the end which he designs, admits of an easy solution. For we do not contend that God by his absolute will (which not only predetermines the ordination of means to an end, but also the infallible production of the end) intended actually to procure the salvation of each and every man through the death of Christ; but that he appointed, willed, and ordained that the death of his Son should be, and should be esteemed, a ransom of such a kind that it might be offered and applied to all men individually. And this God evidently accomplished. For all acknowledge, or ought to acknowledge, that Christ so suffered, and died, and was offered up for the sins of all men, that all together, without exception, might, through his death, by believing, obtain remission of sins and salvation. Nor is it contrary to the Divine wisdom to appoint and sometimes to confer upon men ineans ordained and applicable to a certain end, and at the same time to permit many men to fail of attaining that end. For by this means God attains a higher end, even the illustration of his glory, by the demonstration of his justice towards those who abuse the means ordained to procure the salvation of mankind, and by the demonstration of his mercy towards those who, by the benefit of his special grace, use the aforesaid means to their salvation ; and, lastly, by the demonstration of his supreme dominion, and free liberty towards those to whom he did not think fit even to reveal the means, which were supplied by himself for the salvation of mankind, and which were applicable by his own ordination to any persons whatever. Respecting the omnipotence of God also we reply, That it is not weakened in any degree by the admission of our opinion. For we do not say, that through the wickedness of some men God cannot apply the death of Christ for salvation to all, which he appointed and ordained to be applicable to all; but that God who hath mercy upon whom he will, and whom he will he leaves hardened, would not heal this wickedness in all men by the remedy of special grace, would not make the death of Christ to be applied to all, which he made applicable to all. And here, of him who is delivered through the death of Christ, which is applied to him by the assistance of special grace, God would rightly say, Thus I will : Of him who, notwithstanding this applicable remedy, is condemned, no application having been made, he would also say, Take that thine is and go thy way; I will give to this man what is not due to him, I will not give it to thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Here if any one should murmur, he would deservedly hear, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?
[BODY] <!--v2p401-402-->OBJECTION 14. If we assert that Christ died for all, it will follow, First, That Christ had loved all men with the highest and greatest love. John xv. 13, Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends, And 1 John iii. 16, Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. Which does not appear, because he does not lead all to life by this his death. Secondly, it would also follow, that Christ equally loved Peter and Judas, the elect and the non-elect. For he exhibited to all an infallible proof of the highest love; but there are no different degrees in that which 1s the highest. Lastly, if Christ so died for all that by his death he procured for those who were not elected only the possibility of salvation under the condition of faith, or a remedy only applicable, which he knew would not be applied, but for the elect the application itself and salvation; he may seem to have loved those more who were not elected than the elect, because it shews greater love to suffer death for any one in order to acquire for him a small than a great good ; as he would shew a more ardent love for any one who should expose himself to death lest another should be hurt only a very little, than if he should do it lest he should be capitally punished.
[BODY] <!--v2p402-404-->REPLY 14. The object of both these passages of Scripture is the same; namely, to kindle in Christians a mutual and most tender love from the example of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who so far loved us as to endure death for us. But the sense of the words is this. To endure death or to give up life for another, is the greatest external effect and most evident proof of love; which, since Christ exhibited it towards us by laying down his life for us, we ought also, where there is need, to lay down our lives for the brethren, as it is in the aforesaid place, 1 John iii. 16. Therefore, it is not enough that we should be ready to expend gold and silver, to undergo difficult labours or dangers for the brethren, because there is a much greater love, that is, a greater, more certain, and clearer proof of our love, namely, that we should lay down our life for them. And because there is nothing dearer to any one than himself, therefore there is no greater testimony of love than this, that any one should give himself up for his friend. Now I come nearer to the solution and say, Although we confess that no one has greater love, that is, can manifest on his own part a greater external effect of his love, than in laying down his life, because no one has any thing more precious than his life; yet, we deny that it can be rightly deduced from hence, that the love of a person in dying for some others, is absolutely, simply, and in every respect as to them all, the highest and greatest that any one can conceive. For, in the first place, when one person lays down his life for many, nothing hinders that he might not possibly love one more vehemently than another as to the internal act: as if we should suppose that Jacob had suffered death to deliver all his sons from captivity, yet we should assert rightly that he did not love them all in the highest degree, but he loved Joseph and Benjamin more than the others. "Therefore, the highest love as to intenseness cannot be inferred in respect of all to whom this greatest proof of love is exhibited. Secondly, Any one may give up his life for many promiscuously, and yet as to the greatness of the good willed, love some much more than others, and therefore not embrace all either with the highest or with equal love. For the greatness of love is not to be esteemed only by the precious thing which is given to the person loved by the lover, but by the benefits which are intended to be conferred upon the person loved by that gift. For example, if a king's son should suffer death for all who were guilty of treason, on this condition, that all should be absolved who were willing to humble themselves as suppliants before the king's throne, and faithfully promise obedience for the future; but he should design to obtain this in addition from his father for some of them, that on account of the merit of his death he would deign to persuade them to this submission and obedience, and having thus persuaded them, would not only absolve them, but also advance them to the highest honours: who does not perceive that death would have been endured for all, and yet that all were not loved in the highest and greatest degree? For since £o /ove is to wish good things to any one, and to confer them, it follows that in a common benefit being granted to many, those are more loved to whom greater good things are designed and conferred from the aforesaid benefit. Lastly, Although men cannot exhibit to men a greater external testimony of love than that one should die for another, yet God the Father, Christ the Mediator, the God-man, and the Holy Spirit can exhibit a greater secret act and effect of their own love to- Chap. ui. ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS. 395 wards some of those for whom Christ died than towards others ; as if they should determine to give to some not only remission of sins and eternal life through the merit of the death of Christ, provided they should believe in this their Redeemer ; but also should choose some from eternity unto life effectually to participate in Christ the Redeemer, and should prepare for them and infallibly give all those things which should effect this infallible participation and application. From these things it appears that that inference is not tenable, Christ died for all; Therefore, he loved all with the highest and with equal love; because, this common benefit of his death being granted to all, yet he may love some more intensely than others, and decree, prepare, and give to some more and greater benefits from the merit of his death than to others. Which is evident: in the elect themselves, for they all confess that Christ suffered for all of them, and yet no one would affirm that Christ embraced with equal love every one (if I may so speak) of the multitude of the elect, as he did the patriarchs, apostles, or his own most blessed mother, or enriches every one with equal gifts of grace and glory redounding from the merit of his death. But the other argument, in which it is inferred, If Christ suffered death for all, he would shew greater love to the non-elect than to the elect, because it argues greater love to endure death for any one to procure for him some little good than a great one, seems to me little agreeable to right reason. If different kinds of death were to be suffered for different persons, this objection might have some appearance of truth; but where one death is endured for all, there it is evident that he is more loved to whom he who dies intends more and greater benefits from this one death. — For if /o love is to wish good things to another, then to wish greater benefits is to love more. But in this manner the love of the dying Christ manifested itself towards the elect, and those who were not elected ; for from one and the same death he willed that more and greater benefits should arise to the former than to the latter.
[BODY] <!--v2p405-->OBJECTION 15. Means wisely destined do not exceed their adequate end. But the adequate end of the death of Christ is the salvation of the elect. Therefore the death of Christ has no ordination to any persons whatever who are not elected. Therefore it is falsely stated to be applicable to all men by the ordination of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p405-406-->REPLY 15. IT acknowledge that the infallible salvation of the elect is, in subserviency to the glory of God, a certain special and most excellent end, for the obtaining of which the death of Christ was destined ; but I deny that it was the only or sole end. For God sent his Son into the world, and willed that he should die, not only that he might effectually save the elect, but also that remission of sins and eternal life might be brought to and also conferred upon mankind generally in the Gospel, if they should believe. But it is not understood that this general or conditional covenant is confirmed, unless the death of Christ is presupposed to be applicable to all men according to the ordination of God, and actually to be applied to any one as soon as he should have believed. This end the Scripture hath clearly indicated in many places; in John iii. 14, 15, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. And John vi. 40, This is the will of. him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son and believeth on him may have everlasting life. And Acts x. 43, To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins. I omit other passages. From these it will sufficiently appear, that although not all, but only the elect believe, God specially softening their hearts, yet that the death of Christ was so offered to God the Father by the Son, and is so indiscriminately offered by God the Father to mankind, and is so announced promiscuously to all by the ministers of the Gospel, that any one may collect from thence that there is a. kind of firm and stedfast ordination of God, according to which the death of Christ may pertain to all men. This ordination the non-elect render useless to themselves by their own unbelief; but they do not cause such an ordination to be made void, or that it should not be acknowledged to have been established by the death of Christ to these unbelievers. For if we admit this, any unbeliever may pretend, Although I should believe the Gospel, I should not be delivered from my sins by the death of Christ, because the death of Christ had no ordination according to which I could be a partaker of it. Which, on the other hand, is opposed by the words of Christ himself, John iii. 17, 18, God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. He that believeth on him is not condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is what Prosper says (Ad Obj. Vine), The death of Christ : has indeed in itself what may benefit all men, but if 1t is not received it will not heal. That which has in itself that it may profit all men, has it from the general ordination of God ; but that it is not received by many through faith, this happens from the common unbelief of mankind ; that it is received by some proceeds from the special compassion of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p406-->OBJECTION 16. Itis absurd to declare that the death of Christ is a ransom applicable by the ordination of God to those to whom it is not applied, because in the very death of Christ there was the most sure application of death for all those for whom it is truly affirmed that he died and suffered: Therefore, the death of Christ is not a remedy ordained by God, except for certain individual persons elected and known to God only, to whom at length it becomes saving as to the event.
[BODY] <!--v2p406-407-->REPLY 16. We deny that there is any thing absurd in the aforesaid sentiment, which we have demonstrated to be true, and agreeable to Divine wisdom. But that which is objected, As to all for whom Christ died, in the death of Christ himself is included also the infallible application of his death, that does not seem to us to be conceded. For the oblation of Christ considered merely in itself, altogether obtains from God, that every individual who is willing to believe in Christ shall be saved. This efficacy of the death of Christ the Gospel proclaims and promises to all the world; but that infallible purpose of applying this death to certain persons, the ministers of the Gospel cannot promise to any mortal by name. We say, therefore, that the death of Christ was ordained for all those to whom remission of sins may be announced through faith in his blood, which grace regards every partaker of human nature. But we confess that the death of Christ is infallibly to be applied to the elect alone, because the certainty of the application depends, as to the primary cause, on the secret and eternal act of God in predestinating, and not only on the act of Christ in offering up himself for men. Christ, therefore, in offering up himself had a general intention conformed to the ordination of the Father, namely, that he might deliver any persons whatsoever indiscriminately from the guilt of their sins, provided they should believe in him, and in this sense he is said to have offered up himself for all. He had also, as conscious of the Divine predestination, a special intention conformed to the secret and eternal good pleasure of the Father, namely, that he might obtain through the merit of his death for his sheep, who were given to him according to the decree of election, and might give them faith, salvation, and all things. And with this special intention it is said, that he laid down his life for his own peculiar people, that is, for certain individual persons. That which comes to certain persons from the death of Christ, by the special act of Divine predestination, ought not to overthrow that which is acquired by all through the very act of the oblation. The infallible application to one person rather than to another may be ascribed to predestination, but that. which may be applicable to every individual through faith, may be assigned, from the tenor of the Divine covenant, to the oblation of Christ itself.
[BODY] <!--v2p407-408-->Osnjrcri0N 17. The last objection is derived from those passages in which the death of Christ is expressly referred to certain. persons; from which they infer, that they have no regard to others. The passages which are Chap. tii. ANSWERS TO OBJECTIONS. 399 relied on are these, Matt. i. 21, Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. John x. 15, I lay down my life for my sheep. John xi. 5, Jesus died, that he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad ; and such like.
[BODY] <!--v2p408-409-->REPLY 17, From the aforesaid testimonies, and others which are similar, it is well concluded that the death of Christ, according to the will of God in sending his Son, and of the Son in offering himself, pertains in a special manner to the peculiar people who are known only to God, that is, to the elect. But that special mode is of this kind, that he cannot be said to have died for these alone, but he died for these only with the certain, eternal, gratuitous purpose of infallibly saving them, through the free gift of his special mercy flowing from some special provi-' dence, which we call predestination. But from testimonies of this kind, which refer to certain persons, the death of Christ, not considered simply, but complicated with the decree of secret predestination, it 1s wrongly inferred, that this death does not pertain to all men in some general way. But the general mode is of this kind, that we should acknowledge that Christ died for the whole human race, with an evangelical covenant, and that a most sure one, concerning expiating sins and conferring eternal life on each and every man, provided they should embrace this Redeemer of the world with a true faith. And hence it is, that although some passages occur in the holy Scriptures, in which Christ is said to have died for the elect, or for his own peculiar people, yet none occur in which it is denied that he died for any persons, many occur in which it is asserted that he died forall. For the Spirit of God was willing to shew to those that believed in the death of Christ the special privilege of the elect, but he was unwilling to overwhelm in silence the common privilege of the human race in the same death of Christ. It is our part, therefore, to leave to God the decree of his secret predestination, according to which he determined how far, and to whom, he will effectually apply this death of Christ by the gift of his special grace; and in the mean time, to acknowledge with grateful minds the sum of his revealed Gospel, which promulgates That one died for all, that whosoever should believe in him may have eternal life. On this subject Ambrose says (In Luc. lib. vi. cap. 7), Although Christ suffered for all, yet he suffered especially for us, because he suffered for his Church. And so far we have laid before you our first proposition, explained, confirmed, and vindicated from objections to the contrary. We have been the longer in treating of it, because (as it was observed) it contains the chief part of the matter, and opens the way to resolve the rest, in the discussion of which we shall be much shorter. Let us, therefore, proceed to the second proposition.
[H1] 4|CHAPTER IV
[H2] THE SECOND PROPOSITION STATED, EXPLAINED AND CONFIRMED
[BODY] <!--v2p410-411-->IN our first proposition we endeavoured to shew that the death or merit of Christ was appointed by God, proposed in the holy Scriptures, and to be. considered by us, as an universal remedy applicable to all men for salvation from the ordination of God. And on this account we hesitate ' not to assert that Christ died for all men, inasmuch as he endured death, by the merit and virtue of which all men individually who obey the Gospel may be delivered from death and cbtain eternal salvation. But because some persons in such a way concede that Christ died for all men, that with the same breath they assert that he died for the elect alone, and so expound that received distinction of Divines, That he died for all sufficiently, but for the elect effectually, that they entirely extinguish the first part of the sentence; we will lay down a second proposition, which will afford an occasion of discussing that subject expressly, which we have hitherto only glanced at slightly by the way. This second proposition, therefore, shall be reduced into this form; if it is rather prolix, pardon it. The death of Christ is the universal cause of the salvation of mankind, and Christ himself is acknowledged to have died for all men sufficiently, not by reason of the mere sufficiency or of the intrinsic value, according to which the death of God is a price more than sufficient for redeeming a thousand worlds ; but by reason of the Evangelical covenant confirmed with the whole human race through the merit of this death, and of the Divine ordination depending upon it, according to which, under the possible condition of faith, remission of sins and eternal life is decreed to be set before every mortal man who will believe it, on account of the merits of Christ. In handling this proposition we shall do two things. First, we shall explain some of the terms. Secondly, we shall divide our proposition into certain parts, and establish them separately by some arguments.
[BODY] <!--v2p411-413-->In the first place, therefore, is to be explained, what we mean by mere sufficiency, and what by that which is commonly admitted by Divines, That Christ died for all sufficiently. If we speak of the price of redemption, that ransom is to be acknowledged sufficient which exactly answers to the debt of the captive; or which satisfies the demand of him who has the power of liberating the captive. The equality of one thing to another, or to the demands of him who has power over the captive, constitutes what we call this mere sufficiency. This shall be illustrated by examples. Suppose my brother was detained in prison for a debt of a thousand pounds. If I have in my possession so many pounds, I can truly affirm that this money is sufficient to pay the debt of my brother, and to free him from it. But while it is not offered for him, the mere sufficiency of the thing is understood, and estimated only from the value of it, the act of offering that ransom being wanting, without which the aforesaid sufficiency effects nothing. For the same reason, if many persons should be capitally condemned for the crime of high treason, and the king himself against whom this crime was committed should agree that he would be reconciled to all for whom his son should think fit to suffer death : Now the death of the Son, according to the agreement, is appointed to be a sufficient ransom for redeeming all those for whom it should be offered. But if there should be any for whom that ransom should not be offered, as to those it has only a mere sufficiency, which is supposed from the value of the thing considered in itself, and not that which is understood from the act of offering. To these things I add, If we admit the aforesaid ransom not only to be sufficient from the equality of one thing to the other, and from his demand, who requires nothing more for the redemption of the captives; but also to be greater and better in an infinite degree, and to exceed all their debts, yet if there should not be added to this the intention and act of offering for certain captives, although such a ransom should be ever so copious and superabundant, considered in itself and from its intrinsic value, yet what was said of the sufficiency may be said of the superabundance, that there was a mere superabundance of the thing, but that it effected nothing as yet for the liberation of the persons aforesaid. Now to this mere sufficiency, which regards nothing else than the equal or superabundant worth of the appointed price of redemption, I oppose another, which, for the sake of perspicuity, I shall call ordained sufficiency. This is understood when the thing which has respect to the ransom, or redemption price, is not only equivalent to, or superior in value to the thing redeemed, but also is ordained for its. redemption by some wish to offer or actual offering. Thus a thousand talents laid up in the treasury of a prince are said to be a sufficient ransom to redeem ten citizens taken captive by an enemy; but if there is not an intention to offer, and an actual offering and giving these talents for those captives, or for some of them, then a mere and not an ordained sufficiency of the thing is supposed as to those persons for whom it is not given. But if you add the act and intention offering them for the liberation of certain persons, then the ordained sufficiency is asserted as to them alone. Further, this ordained sufficiency of the ransom for the redemption of a captive may be twofold: Absolute ; when there is such an agreement between him who gives and him who receives this price of redemption for the liberation of the captives, that as soon as the price is paid, on the act of payment the captives are immediately delivered. Conditional; when the price is accepted, not that it may be paid immediately, and the captive be restored to liberty ; but that he should be delivered under a condition if he should first do something or other. When we say that Christ died sufficiently for all, we do not understand the mere sufficiency of the thing with a defect of the oblation as to the greater part of mankind, but that ordained sufficiency, which has the intent and act of offering joined to it, and that for all ; but with the conditional, and not the absolute ordination which we have expressed. In one word, when we affirm that Christ died for all sufficiently, we mean, That there was in the sacrifice itself a sufficiency or equivalency, yea, a superabundance of price or dignity, if it should be compared to the whole human race ; that both in the offering and the accepting there was à kind of ordination, according to which the aforesaid sacrifice was offered and accepted for the redemption of all mankind. This may suffice for the explanation of the first term.
[BODY] <!--v2p413-415-->Secondly ; That is also to be explained, which is stated in the proposition; namely, That through the merit of the death of Christ, a new covenant was entered into between God and the human race. By this covenant we understand that which is urged by the Apostle, Gal. iii. Believe, and thou shalt live, and is opposed to the legal command, Do this and thou shalt live. This agreement, which promises salvation to every sinner under the condition of faith, has no foundation or confirmation any where else than in the blood of the Mediator; without the effusion of which no mortal man could aspire to eternal life, not even though believing. But through the death of Christ having been accepted by God as a ransom, now it is lawful for any man indiscriminately to ascend into heaven by believing, as the Apostle shews in Romans iii. 21 to 26; and Christ himself, Mark xvi. 15, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. Therefore in this evangelical covenant, confirmed by the death of Christ, which the Apostles published to the whole world, and the ministers of the. Gospel preach at the present time, there is no difference of persons made. As well Esau shall be saved, if he should believe in the Messiah, as Jacob shall be condemned if he should not believe. But it is to be confessed, that there is also another ordination of God, secret and absolute, regarding certain definite persons, and founded likewise on the death of Christ, which obtains the name of the new covenant. But this is understood rather as agreed upon between God the Father and Christ, than between God and us, For it is that. which is related by the Prophet Isaiah (liii. 10), When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed; and is explained by the Apostle, Heb. viii. 10, This is the covenant that 1 will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people, &c. As if he should say, That Christ by his death not only established that conditional covenant which may be published to all men individually in this form, If thou shalt believe, whosoever thou art, thou shalt be saved through the death of Christ, but also that secret and absolute covenant concerning the giving of faith to certain persons and infallibly saving them through Christ and for his sake. But it is to be observed, That this latter covenant is known to Christ alone, nor can it be opened to any: one by the ministers of Christ, as to the individual persons whom it embraces. For the Apostles themselves could, and we can preach to every man that conditional and revealed covenant, If thou shalt believe, thou shalt be saved. But neither could they, nor can we promise infallibly to any one, Thou art one of those whom God gave to Christ the Mediator, and to whom, through Christ and for his sake, he will give persevering faith, and will infallibly lead to eternal life. For this would be the same as if we should declare that we were in the councils of God before the foundations of the world were laid, and could point out with our finger the elect and the non-elect. Without this latter covenant, which is more properly understood to be established between God and men, that first conditional covenant would be in vain to all men through human depravity, and the precious and infinitely meritorious blood of Christ would flow in vain. But since, as it was said, God alone knows them to whom this covenant has regard, it is our business to urge and press that first conditional covenant, which is revealed to us; and this is that which we contend was confirmed by the death of Christ with the whole human race. Lastly, it is to be observed, although that conditional covenant is not actually made known to all men, yet it is of such a kind, that it may be divulged and announced to every mortal; although every one will not claim for themselves their right in this covenant, yet there is no one to whom it is not lawful, through the merit of the death of Christ, to promise this to himself and to claim it according to the covenant, If I believe, I shall be saved. It is established, as to all men individually, but through some special kind of providence of God overruling it, it is revealed and made known to some and not to others.
[BODY] <!--v2p415-416-->It remains, in the third place, that we should explain what was laid down in the proposition, respecting the Divine ordination depending on the aforesaid covenant, according to which, remission of sins and eternal life is decreed to be exhibited to every man, under the possible condition of faith. And here that only needs explanation which we affirm, that the condition of faith is possible to every one. We would not then that this should be so understood as if every one had in himself an internal and proportionate natural principle for eliciting the act of true and living faith. For this was the error of Faustus, of Rhegium, and the Semipelagians, who ascribe faith to free-will, and dream that the gift of faith is as it were naturally inborn and inherent in them. To this those words of Faustus have respect (lib. 2. De lib. arbitr. cap. 6), You see that the benefit of believing is not a new privilege, but an old one; and that, at the very beginning of the world, as the mind of man was endowed by its excellent Author with understanding and reason, so also was it with faith. And lest any should think that this gift of faith was lost in fallen man, he adds a little afterwards — (cap. 7), That every follower of virtue should cultivate in himself this general gift of faith with special diligence. See more on this opinion in the work itself. Although, therefore, he calls faith a gift, yet he intimates that it is a natural and general gift, as though it were possible to elicit this act of believing by the power of free-will. But from this we are altogether averse, nor have we regard to this in saying that the condition of faith is possible. Moreover, neither do we found this possibility of believing in any supernatural gift received by all. For we dare not maintain, that gratuitous assistance sufficient to produce the act of believing is given to all, since the Scripture itself teaches, in a manner sufficiently clear, that faith is the special gift of God. This, therefore, is disallowed, since, with the most learned Bannesius (in Quest. 23, Ars. 3 Concl. 8) we found the possibility of performing this condition neither on any natural and innate gift, nor on a supernatural gift received by all; but ina supernatural gift to be received possibly by any living person, according to ordinary law, as the Schoolmen observe. These things being thus expounded and determined, I will now divide the aforesaid proposition into three parts, which I will confirm separately by the reasons to be alleged.
[BODY] <!--v2p416-417-->First. The mere sufficiency of the death of Christ, which is estimated only by the intrinsic value of this ransom, without: that ordained sufficiency which arises from the intention and act of offering, is not so far available that Christ may be truly said to have died for all men sufficiently. have thought that this proposition should be laid down for the sake of those who strenuously maintain that Christ died for the elect alone, and yet (which I confess I am too dull to understand) admit that Christ died for all sufficiently, and sometimes greatly exaggerate this sufficiency as extending itself to all mankind. They profess, indeed, that Christ died for all men, for all orders, states, and kinds of men, yea also for individual persons as to the sufficiency of his merits. (Contra rem. Collat. p. 104, & Status Controv. p. 144.) The Veteranici, in their judgment exhibited to the Synod of Dort, write thus (Acta Synod. Dordr. p. 99) When Christ is said to have died for all, this may be understood of the sufficiency of his merit, or the greatness of the price. Since the death of the Son of God is the only perfect and sufficient ransom for expiating and blotting out all the sins of the whole world: the immense merit of righteousness, the universal medicine of death, the eternal fountain of life, &c. A little after, This sufficiency of the ransom as to the reprobate, has a double end, one in itself, the other accidentally. — The end in itse!f is, that God testifies that he delights not in the perdition of the wicked, since he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. The accidental end is, that by this sufficiency of the ransom they might be rendered inexcusable. For these perish, not through the fault of Christ, but of themselves, when, through their own unbelief, they refuse the benefits of Christ offered in the Gospel. So far their opinion. I deny that this sufficiency of the death of Christ for reconciling all men can be rightly conceived from the mere sufficiency of the thing offered, unless there be added the ordained sufficiency from the act of offering. Which may be proved thus:
[BODY] <!--v2p417-418-->ARGUMENT lst. When we say that Christ died sufficiently for all men, we say nothing else than that he was offered up sufficiently for all men, or that he gave himself as a ransom or price of redemption sufficiently for all men. But £o die for all, or to be offered up for all, or to give himself for all, designates the act of dying, or of offering up himself to deliver all, completed by some ordination. Therefore, the sufficiency of the ransom alone, without the intention and act of offering accomplished as to the persons, cannot make this assertion true. Christ died sufficiently for all, But common sense refuses that it should be granted that he died sufficiently for all, who is denied to have died or to have been offered up for some. But granting the intrinsic sufficiency of the ransom to redeem a thousand worlds, at the same time it must be granted that this same ransom is not yet offered in any way for many men, nor yet offered up sufficiently. For as ten thousand pounds are enough, and more than sufficient to liberate five debtors, who each owe two hundred pounds; yetif this entire sum should be offered and paid to the creditor for two only by name, the other three being excluded, the sufficiency and superabundance of this ransom in itself will not effect, that it may be said to be given and paid sufficiently for those three: thus, in this common cause of the human race, although the precious blood of Christ be a ransom more than sufficient for blotting out the debts of every individual, yet it cannot be from thence inferred that he was sufficiently offered for them, who, in the very act of offering, are openly excluded. Therefore, they do not seem to interpret so much as to ridicule this generally received and most true decision of Divines, That Christ died for all men sufficiently, who transfer the term sufficiently from the intention and act of dying to the mere sufficiency or intrinsic value of the death considered in itself; as if the sense were, The death of Christ hath in itself. sufficient merit and value to blot out the sins of all men, but Christ was not offered nor died for all; since the evident sense of this saying is, That Christ died for all sufficiently, although what he offered for all sufficiently, he will not apply to all effectually, on account of the intervening obstacle of unbelief.
[BODY] <!--v2p418-420-->ARGUMENT 2. In this distinction of the Schoolmen, which our people commonly admit, viz. That Christ died for all sufficiently, but for the predestinated effectually, the words sufficiently and effectually denote that which was common to all men, whether elect or non-elect, in the mode of the oblation, and that which was peculiar to the elect alone. It was common to both, that Christ died or was offered as a sacrifice to God the Father sufficiently for them. But how can this first term sufficiently be referred promiscuously to the elect and the non-elect, if it marks out a mere sufficiency of the thing, excluding the ordination of the same thing to individuals, which arises from the intention and act of offering? Or, what need is there of that other term effectually, to make a distinction in the mode of the oblation, or in the intention of offering, as to the elect and non-elect, if Christ had no intention at all of offering himself up except for the predestinated alone? This twofold distinction is evidently frivolous and vain, where in things distinguished from each other, both parts are not presupposed. It is therefore to be observed, that the holy Fathers, when urging the universal sufficiency of the death of Christ, do not stop at the mere sufficiency of the thing, but at the act, intention, and mode of offering. In this manner Athanasius* always speaks in his treatise On the incarnation of the Word. I will mention one or two passages ; Christ the Son of God, having assumed a body like to ours, because we were all exposed to death, gave himself up to death for us all as a sacrifice to his Father (p. 42.) Again, (p. 48) After he had given proofs of his Divinity, it now remained that he should offer up a sacrifice for all, delivering the temple of his body to death for all, that he might set all free from original sin, &c. Observe, that the mark of universality is united, not with the intrinsic sufficiency of the thing offered, but with the intention and act of offering, which referred to all men. Thus Augustine (vol. 9. p. 467. Tract. 92 on John), The blood of Christ was shed for the remission of all sins ix such a manner, that it can blot out the sin itself for which it was shed. He does not say, that there was a sufficient intrinsical value in the blood which was shed to expiate the sins of all mankind, which is allowed by all who know how to value aright the blood of God, but he urges the manner and act of offering, and in that respect points out its universality. Thus it was shed for the remission of al! sins. It is one thing to say that the blood of Christ has of itself and in itself a sufficient value to blot out the sins of all men, and another to affirm that it was actually shed for the remission of all sins, as Augustine says. But why do I mention the holy Fathers ? The sacred Scriptures speak of the death of Christ so as to refer its universal efficacy not to the mere dignity of the sacrifice offered, but to the act and intention of the offering. 1Tim. ii. 6, Who gave himself a ransom for all. The Apostle does not say, This ransom in itself, and in its own intrinsic value, is sufficient for the redemption of all, but in reality was given for a few, not for all; but, he gave himself for all. Therefore, the intention and act of Christ in giving himself includes all mankind, in like manner as that of the Father in sending his Son; God so loved the world, &c. (John ili. 16.) Therefore, the mere sufficiency of the thing cannot so far avail, that Christ should be atfirmed to have died sufficiently for all, without an ordained sufficiency to all from the intention and act of his offering.
[BODY] <!--v2p420-422-->ARGUMENT 3. Christ is acknowledged to have died sufficiently for all men, in that sense in which it is denied : that he died for the fallen angels. This is plain, and admitted by all the orthodox, who often mention this difference between the evil angels and some bad men, at least while they are living in this world. The words of Ambrose on Ps. cxviii. refer to this, The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord (Serm. 8. p. 658), That mystical Sun of righteousness rose for all, came to all, Christ suffered for all, rose again forall. But if any one does not believe in Christ, he deprives himself of that general benefit. A little afterwards, Perhaps you will say, Why is it not said, that heaven is full of the mercy of the Lord? Because there are spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places, but the common benefit of. Divine pardon and the remission of sins does not pertain to them. From which things it appears, That Christ so suffered for the whole human race, that all men have from thence a common right of obtaining pardon through faith, which the demons have not, because he did not in any way die for them. One of our own countrymen, who contends strenuously for limiting the death of Christ, yet willingly grants this, (Ames, apud Grevinch. p. 55) The sufficiency of the death does not refer in the same way to mankind as to devils. He paid a sufficient ransom for all men, if they would only embrace it, but not for devils. This difference in the payment of this ransom is worthy of observation. It was so paid to God that it could not redeem devils, even if they might be supposed to believe; because it was not paid for them ; but it was so exhibited and given by God, that it might redeem any of the human race, if they would believe ; whence could this be, unless it was offered and paid for them? Forit could not avail for the deliverance of any persons whatsoever, even if they should believe, unless it were supposed to be given and offered by God for them in a general view of the human race, even when they did not believe. Having, therefore, established this distinction between the sufficiency of the death of Christ as to men and as to devils, namely, that the death of Christ is understood to be sufficient for all men in the same sense as it is rightly denied to be sufficient for the fallen angels, let us pass from this major proposition to the minor. I say, then, if we do not acknowledge any other sufficiency in the death of Christ as to the redemption of all mankind, except that which we have called mere sufficiency, and which has respect to the intrinsic value of the ransom, the ordination of the offering as to individuals being disregarded— there is no distinction made between such persons and the devils themselves as to the right of obtaining pardon and remission by means of this ransom, which was mentioned above by Ambrose, and granted to men universally, but denied toangels. Itis clear, because the value of the death of Christ is estimated from the dignity of the sufferer: it therefore had in itself, intrinsically, not only a sufficiency, but an infinite superabundance, even if there should be placed in the other scale the sins, not only of all mankind, but of the fallen angels. "There is therefore to be granted, with respect to mankind, not only that mere sufficiency, which depends upon the inherent dignity of the thing offered, but that ordained sufficiency which arises from the intention and act of Christ referring this his passion to all mankind, and not referring it to the fallen angels. This being granted, Christ is truly said to have died for all men sufficiently with that sufficiency which does not exist with regard to the apostate angels, and of which it may be truly said, that Christ did not die either effectually or sufficiently for the fallen angels.
[BODY] <!--v2p422-->Objection. But perhaps some one may meet this argument and assert, That the mere sufficiency of the thing offered, considered in itself, makes out as to men, that Christ may be rightly said to have suffered for all sufficiently; but does not make it outas to devils, because (Ames, Coron. p. 99) that that ransom 1s not sufficient which is not apt and suitable. But a great part of the aptitude in Christ to take away the sins of mankind consisted in his assuming the likeness of sinful flesh. Since, therefore, he did not take on himself the nature of angels, he was not in a suitable condition, nor was his death sufficient to take away the sins of the evil angels. .
[BODY] <!--v2p422-423-->Reply. This argument is unsound in both parts. For that sufficiency, (whatever aptitude and congruity it may have) if it has not also some ordination and act of offering relative to individuals, does not make out that Christ can be said to have suffered altogether for such persons, much less that he can be affirmed to have suffered for them sufficiently. In vain, therefore, is Christ's assumption of human nature brought forward by those who contend that he died for the elect alone, to deduce from thence that he suffered sufficiently or insufficiently for all mankind. The exception is also weak on the other side, because, although there was not that similitude of nature between Christ and angels which there was between Christ and mankind, yet this could not hinder that the ransom paid by Christ, that is, the blood of God, should be in itself, on account of its own value, most sufficient to take away the sins of angels also. For what guilt of any creature can be so great, that the blood-shedding of God could not suffice for its expiation, which is of infinite value from the dignity of the Divine person ; and therefore, notwithstanding the dissimilitude of human nature, if God had deigned to grant this right in the death of Christ to angels, it would also be applicable for the redemption of angels. God indeed was willing to have compassion upon the human race, and not to have compassion upon angels; he willed that the Redeemer should not assume the angelic nature, but the seed of Abraham. Hence we may conclude, that the death of Christ was not ordained as a ransom for the redemption of angels; but we neither can nor ought to conclude, that it was not a ransom in itself of sufficient dignity, value, and efficacy, if it had been ordained. It might be argued on the other hand, that Christ, notwithstanding the dissimilitude of nature, is a sufficient, fit, and suitable head to communicate grace even to angels, from whence it is asserted by the most learned Divines, that the gifts of grace are merited even by the good angels. Since, therefore, the merits of Christ do not profit the evil angels, it is not to be referred to the insufficiency of the thing, but to the will of God alone ; and consequently, if we affirm that there are many human beings to whom the passion and merit of Christ is in no way ordained, as to the sufficiency of the death of Christ, the state and condition of these will not be different from that of the devils.
[BODY] <!--v2p423-426-->ARGUMENT 4. We prove that the mere sufficiency in itself of the thing offered cannot verify that dogma of Divines, That Christ died for all men sufficiently ; and this appears from the confession of those who deny that the death of Christ was paid for the whole human race, and who limit it to the elect alone. Thus Piscator* (in Resp. Apologet. Sec. 87), It cannot be said, That Christ died for all mankind sufficiently, because it would follow that he died for all, the contrary to which is demonstrated. And in the same place, That distinction which is made, That Christ died for all mankind sufficiently, for the elect effectually, is vain, because it implies a contradiction, &c. It implies a real contradiction in those who admit a mere sufficiency of his death as to all mankind, and deny its universal ordination to procure salvation for all men. They are bound, therefore, to explode this distinction, which has been hitherto approved by the orthodox, or to acknowledge with us the ordained sufficiency of the death of Christ for the deliverance of all. The very learned Pareus seems to be of this opinion, when he affirms (Act. Syn. Dord. p. 213), That as to the sufficiency of his ransom and merit, Christ died and was willing to die for each and every man. Here he does not make the sufficiency consist in this only, that the death of Christ was sufficient of its own intrinsic value to redeem all, but also, in the will of Christ dying and ordaining his death to be sufficient for the deliverance of all. And here it is to be observed by the way, that they are deceived who . confine the death of Christ to the elect alone, so as to conclude that he was willing to die for them only, and yet pretend (Palatini Synod. Dord. p. 88) That there is no question or contention concerning the sufficiency of the ransom of Christ for each and every man; but all the controversy is respecting the efficacy of this ransom. Truly, granting the sufficiency of the death of Christ in itself for the redemption of a thousand worlds, and granting also, that the efficacy of this death is destined absolutely and infallibly, not to all, but to certain persons actually to be delivered, yet it still remains a matter of controversy, Whether the death of Christ is supposed to have an intrinsic sufficiency for the redemption of all, under this hypothesis: If it availed to offer and pay that ransom forall, and it had not also joined to it the ordination of God, according to which this ransom, sufficient in itself, was actually offered for all, and from thence is applicable and to be applied for salvation to all, if they should be willing to obey the aforesaid ordination and subject themselves to it. For such an ordination we contend, which regards even those who are not saved, because they have not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And hence we say, That Christ died for all men sufficiently. But here some of those who contend that Christ suffered and died for the elect alone, nevertheless wish to appear to defend, not the mere sufficiency of the death of Christ in itself, but that ordained sufficiency from the intention of God which we assert. And for this reason, when they are pressed with arguments, they do not refuse to make mention of the will and intention of God. Let us, therefore, examine their mind and opinion more closely, that we may not beat the air, or fight with a man of straw. Thus a learned man has written on this subject (Ames, Coron. p. 117), When we confess that Christ died for all, that phrase FoR ALL ts admitted hy our party on account of its sufficiency and the intention of God, by which he willed that it should be thus sufficient for all. At the same time it must be observed, that this manner of speaking is improper, but it is not to be rejected, because it has some foundation in the thing itself, and is received among Divines by long use. Others of the same opinion say (Acta Synod. Dord. p. 99), That the counsel and decree of God the Father was, that Christ by his suffering and death, should pay a ransom of such a kind, as, considered in itself, might suffice for the reconciliation of all men. These persons seem to add a sufficiency, besides the mere sufficiency of the thing, relative and pertaining to the reconciliation of all men from the intention and counsel of God. They seem to do this indeed, but do it not in reality. For first, what they say, that they acknowledge that Christ died sufficiently for all, on account of the intention of God, by which he willed that his death might be sufficient for all, is of no account. Since the death of the Son of God did not need any additional intention in order to its being sufficient for all, when it was in itself of infinite value. Yet it needed that it should be given for all, and accepted for their deliverance, under some condition. Intrinsic sufficiency is a certain power and fitness of athing ; (Ames, Coron. p. 99) noris there required, in order to constitute it, the extrinsical act of one intending this sufficiency. But the ordination in behalf of certain persons to be delivered is a voluntary act, and flows from the intention and design of the person ordaining it. It is, therefore, frivolous to join the intention of God with the internal sufficiency of the thing, as the intention ought either to be altogether denied as to Christ having died sufficiently for all; or to be joined with an ordination of his death pertaining to all. Secondly, what they say, that this phrase, Christ died for all sufficiently, has a foundation in the thing itself, cannot be defended from their opinion. If I should say, the death of Christ is a sufficient ransom for all, there is a true foundation for this saying in the thing itself, namely, in the dignity of the person dying; but if l should say, Christ died or was offered on the cross (which are equivalent) for all sufficiently, there is now no foundation on which the truth of this saying can stand, unless 1 assert first, that Christ suffered and was offered for all, and then add the sufficiency of this suffering for all, on account of the dignity of the ransom. He who denies one of these, in vain attempts to defend the other. We therefore conclude, that neither can Christ be truly said to have suffered or died for all sufficiently, nor can the death of Christ be truly acknowledged to be an universal remedy applicable to all men according to the ordination of God, unless in addition to the mere sufficiency of the thing derived from its innate dignity, we admit the settled and fixed decree of God, according to which, from the will of God in accepting this sacrifice, and of Christ in offering it, this death of Christ is able to bring eternal life to each and every man. Hitherto we have treated of the first part of our proposition, in which we have shewn, that that mere sufficiency, which is understood of the death of Christ considered in itself, is not enough for the conclusion, that Christ should be said to have died for all, or that his death should be accounted an universal cause of salvation in regard to the whole human race. Let us now shew what that is which is further requisite for this purpose. For the illustration of this subject, the second thesis may serve:
[BODY] <!--v2p426-427-->Second. The death of Christ, according to the evangelical covenant confirmed by it with all men, is affirmed to have been truly endured for all men, and Christ, in the same respect, is asserted to have died sufficiently for all men. We allude to that covenant of which we have before made mention, Jf thou shalt believe, thou shalt be saved; or Whosoever believeth shall be saved. Rom. x. 9. That this covenant concerning the grant of remission of sins, and the salvation of mankind through faith, was confirmed by the blood-shedding and death of the Son of God, appears, in the first place, from the sacred Scriptures. In the insti- , tution of the Lord’s supper, Christ himself says (Luke xxii. 20), This cup 1s the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you. As if he had said, It is a lively symbol of the Lord's blood, by which the new covenant concerning the remission of sins and our justification by faith is confirmed and established. And the Apostle says (Heb. ix. 22), Without shedding of blood is no remission. Therefore, the covenant made with men, by which God bound himself to remit the sins of those that believe, has its strength or virtue in the death of Christ. The same Apostle teaches, (Rom. iit. 25) that God hath set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. Therefore, this evangelical covenant is founded in the blood or death of Christ, according to which, through faith, remission of sins, justification, and eternal salvation are conferred upon mankind. That I may not dwell too long on a subject sufliciently clear, since this conditional promise, If thou shalt believe, thou shalt be saved, flows from the gracious kindness of God towards men, it cannot have its foundation else- where than in the death and merit of Christ the Mediator, in whom all the gratuitous promises of God are Yea and Amen. (2 Cor. i. 20). Nor, indeed, is the act of faith itself of such value, that it can by its own dignity or merit obtain from God remission of sins and salvation. But of such great value is the death and blood-shedding of the Son of God, that by its own merit and virtue it can justify and save any one that believeth, according to the tenor of the evangelical covenant. "Therefore this covenant was confirmed by the death of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p427-431-->But, secondly, that remains respecting which there are great scruples, namely, Whether this evangelical covenant, If thou shalt believe, thou shalt be saved, which we have shewn to be confirmed by the death of Christ, pertains, according to the Divine ordination, to the whole human race, or only to individuals, and to certain persons 1a particular. We contend that it was confirmed with the whole human race. Which may appear, First, from the command and promise of Christ himself, who, after he had endured and conquered death, sent his Apostles into all the world, (Mark xvi. 15, 16) And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. On which words of promise, the learned Calvin has rightly remarked, That this promise was added that it might allure the whole human race to the faith. (Harm. Evang. p. 374). Itis therefore understood to have been established with the whole human race. For a promise has no power of alluring others to any action than those: for whom it is presupposed to have been made. Secondly, The same appears from the practice of the Apostles, and of all the ministers of the Gospel, conformable to ‘the command and promise of Christ For these, without any respect of nation or predestination, boldly promise forgiveness of sins on condition of faith to each and every person who assembles to hear them. By this act they acknowledge, that the covenant concerning the forgiveness of sins through faith, confirmed by the blood of Christ, is universal. For a conditional covenant cannot be seriously proposed, and a benefit annexed be promised conditionally to those persons to whom the covenant itself is not extended by the will of the maker of it. For example, if a King makes an agreement with certain persons who have been found guilty of high treason, that he will pardon them if they will humbly ask pardon of him; it would not be lawful for this reason for any of the King’s servants to go to the prison and announce to all persons there promiscuously, that pardon would be obtained from the King, if they would only humbly kneel down and ask it; because this conditional agreement regards those only who are included in it by the Royal clemency. Therefore neither would it be lawful for the ministers of God to promise promiscuously to all men remission and salvation on the condition of faith, unless it appeared to them beyond a doubt, that this conditional covenant was made and established for all by the will of God. But the Apostles did this, and we do it; therefore we acknowledge that this covenant was established with each and every man, that is, with the whole human race. But perhaps some one may say, Although this covenant, confirmed by the blood of Christ, should not pertain to all men promiscuously, but only to the elect, yet remission of sins and salvation may be proposed and offered to all, under the hypothesis of faith, because itis certain that the elect alone will perseveringly believe ; and therefore none of the non-elect can ever cause this covenant, which is conditional on the part of God, to be false or violated as to himself. But this answer is of no avail. For the truth of every conditional proposition is to be considered, before the condition is allowed ; therefore, although the condition should never be acted upon, still the truth of the conditional proposition, when rightly made, ought to appear. "Therefore, this conditional proposition or promise, If thou shalt believe, thy sins shall be forgiven thee, is false as to Cain and Judas, unless a true foundation of the connexion should be granted, in case it should happen that they believed. Nor does it at all relate to the truth of the conditional proposition whether they should believe or not, since in such a proposition, the reason of the connexion is regarded, not the truth or falsity of the separate parts. Jf Peter should deny Christ, he shall obtain eternal life, 1s a false proposition, on account of the weakness of the connexion, and yet each part separately was true. Jf Peter should not believe, he will not obtain eternal life, is a true proposition, and yet each part taken separately was false. For Peter both believed and obtained eternal life. Fora like reason, therefore, this conditional declaration If thou shalt believe, thou shalt obtain remission of sins and eternal life, would be false as to a non-elect person, although it should be presupposed that he would never believe, if the antecedent reason and cause of connexion were wanting: but it is wanting, unless a conditional covenant confirmed with all men individually is asserted. — For it does not follow from the declaration, That God by the death of Christ confirmed a covenant concerning the salvation of all the elect through faith ; Therefore, If Cain should believe, he shall be saved. The conditional covenant, therefore, is established with the whole human race. Thirdly, We prove that this evangelical covenant, confirmed by the death of Christ, concerning the giving of salvation on the condition of faith, is universal, by urging further this same argument, and that from the concessions of those who seem to be opposed to us. Those who endeavour to restrict the death of Christ as much as possible, nevertheless grant, that by the merit of his death, there is a way and method appointed, by which any unbeliever may escape deserved condemnation, namely, if he should believe. (Collat. Hag. p. 154). They grant, that the death of Christ would abundantly suffice to save all men, how many soever they may be in the whole world who believe in him. They allow also, That the word of the Gospel concerning Christ crucified, should be announced indiscriminately to the elect and non-elect, and all should be commanded to believe in him, this promise being added, that all who believe in him shall obtain remission of sins. (Acta. Synod. Dord. p. 29, and 2 part, p. 89). These tLings being granted, I argue thus: If mankind, howsoever many they be in the whole world, would obtain remission of sins and salvation, if they should believe; then an universal covenant was established by the death of Christ concerning the salvation of any man whatsoever under the aforesaid condition of faith. But the first is true: Therefore also the second. The reason of the consequence is this, Because that conditional declaration, which they admit both as to the non-elect, and the elect, namely, If thou shalt believe, whosoever thou art, thou shalt be saved, is not as necessarily true from the nature of the thing, as this is, If there is fire, there is heat, or, If he is a man, he is an animal ; it remains, then, that its truth be founded in some voluntary ordination of God, by which he hath decreed, as to any human being whatsoever, that the antecedent being true of him, the consequence is so likewise. Since no third foundation can be assigned, on which the truth of the aforesaid conditional declaration can rest. "Therefore, it must be acknowledged, That this evangelical covenant is universal from the ordination of God himself, and that it equally regards all men individually.
[BODY] <!--v2p431-->If any one should object to this, that the Gospel itself was never preached to all men, and therefore neither does the evangelical covenant embrace the whole human race, or pertain to all men individually ; I answer, That it does not follow,— Because the evangelical covenant is not announced to this nation, or that individual, therefore, it was not made or established with regard to them. But this is a legitimate conclusion, The evangelical covenant is not of itself. annunciable to that nation or this man ; therefore, it does not in any way pertain to them. Since there may be some secret causes why the Gospel is not preached, which prevent it from being announceable to all, which causes it is not my present purpose to ascertain. We say, then, that remission of sins through the death of the Redeemer might have been truly announced in any age, to any nation, and to any man, on condition of faith. Thus, in the time of the old Testament, this covenant was revealed to Job, an alien. So likewise in our own age, if a minister of the Gospel should go to the Antipodes, he would not wait for a new establishment of this conditional covenant, but would at once announce it to them, taking for granted its having been made in their favour. And hence it is that the Apostle calls this word of the Gospel, the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest, &c. (Coloss. i. 26.) He acknowledged it, therefore, to have been established from eternity with the human race, although it was hidden or made manifest to one or another, according to the good pleasure of God. See Romans xvi. 25, 26, and Ephesians iii. 5and 9. It remains that by reason of this universal covenant, established through the death of Christ, with. the whole human race ; we should shew, that we can affirm in a true and sound sense, that Christ suffered or died for all men, which we wish to dispatch in few words.
[BODY] <!--v2p432-->But I must premise, in order to verify this form of speech, that it is not necessary, either from the sense of the Scriptures, or from that of the Fathers, or from the meaning of the words themselves, that we should defend the opinion, that all those for whom it is affirmed that Christ was crucified and died, are to be led by the infallible order of predestination to eternal life through the benefit of the death of Christ; although we willingly acknowledge that the intention of Christ in dying was, that some might be saved, which, in its proper place, we shall confirm by testimonies of the Scriptures, and by perspicuous arguments.
[BODY] <!--v2p432-->First, then, in Scripture language, these two things are not always equivalent, Christ died for these persons, and, God predestinated that through the death of Christ these persons should be infallibly saved ; because the Scriptures often declare universally, that Christ died for all; but never affirm universally, that God predestinated that all men should be saved through the benefit of the death of Christ. For what purpose, I ask, is it that the Spirit of God, in speaking of the death of Christ, frequently makes use of general terms, extending it to all, while in mentioning theDivine predestination, he always uses restrictive terms, limiting it to few, if the death of Christ, and the predestination of God as to mankind, had an equal and altogether the same extent ?
[BODY] <!--v2p432-433-->Secondly, Because in the sacred Scriptures Christ is said in the same sense to have reconciled men, to have given himself as a ransom for men, to have died for men, and he is said also to have reconciled and redeemed the world, inasmuch as the world has in his death an ordained and established universal cause, which, being apprehended by faith by any human being whatsoever, he may be actually reconciled to God and delivered from the guilt of his sins: therefore also, he is rightly conceived to have died for all, inasmuch as all men through his death have eternal life set before them, to be procured by faith. As, therefore, when God is said ¢o have reconciled the world in Christ, or Christ is said to have given himself a ransom for all, it is not said, that God predestinated all to be in Christ, so neither is this to be understood, when it is affirmed that he was crucified and died for all.
[BODY] <!--v2p433-->Lastly, Because the sacred Scriptures clearly extend the death of Christ as a benefit applicable according to the Divine ordination, to those who, through their unbelief, do not apply it to themselves. They extend it, therefore, beyond the number of the elect, of whom there is no one to whom that ransom is not infallibly applied for salvation. This is done in those passages of the Scriptures in which the unbelieving are declared to be condemned, because they believed not in the name of the only begotten Son of God, who was sent into the world, that the world through him might be saved ; (John ii. 17, 18) because they would not come to Christ, that they might have life; (John v. 40) because they put from them the saving word of God, and judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life, (Acts xiii. 46); and lastly, because the promise of entering into the rest of God being disregarded, because of unbelief, by their own fault they came short of it. (Heb. iv. 1.) All these things evince, that according to the sense of the Scriptures, the death and merits of Christ were ordained even for the use of those who despised and rejected them. But that they were not ordained for such persons according to the infallible decree of predestination appears from the event. Therefore, in order to verify the assertion that Christ died for these or the other persons, according to the Scriptures, it is not necessarily required that it should be understood that he died for them, with the absolute purpose of saving them.
[BODY] <!--v2p433-435-->From the Scriptures let us descend to the Fathers. It is evident, that the proposition, Christ died for these men, had not the same meaning with them as this, Christ will infallibly save these men by his death. We shall content ourselves with a very few testimonies, because the thing is well known to those who are moderately versed in the writings of the Fathers. Ambrose, on Psalm cxviii. affirms, that Christ suffered for all, and yet immediately subjoins, that they who do not believe in Christ, deprive themselves of this general benefit. It did not then appear to Ambrose to be the same, that Christ suffered for any one, and that he decreed that he should infallibly be saved by his passion. Prosper (ad Capit. Gallor. resp. 9) The Saviour is most rightly said to have been crucified for the redemption of the whole world. Yet he also affirms, (Sent. 9) Although the blood of Christ be the ransom of the whole world, yet they are excluded from its benefit, who, being delighted with their captivity, are unwilling to be redeemed by it. So that of these it may be truly said, the Redeemer of the world gave his blood for the world, and the world would not be redeemed. (Ad Cap. Gallor. resp. 9.) Prosper, then, did not think these two things one and the same; that Christ was crucified for these persons, and that Christ will procure that these persons shall be infallibly saved. Theophylact, on Heb. ii. 9, God gave his own Son to death for us, not for believers only, but for the whole world. or though all are not saved, yet he fulfilled all that he was in duty bound to do. From which words it appears that it was not the same to Theophylact for any one to say, Christ was given by God to die for all, as if he should say, Christ, from the absolute good pleasure of God, will save all men by his death. Further testimonies are unnecessary. Yet I add, that it cannot be inferred, merely from the words Christ died for all, that Christ so died for all, that he absolutely decreed to bring about by this his death the salvation of all effectually and infallibly ; because he may with sufficient truth and propriety be said to die for any one, who dies to procure the good of another, although the other by his own fault may not receive any advantage from it. The particle for denotes respect to another in the will and intention of the person dying, but does not perpetually and necessarily involve in it such a respect, that no one can be rightly said to die for another, but he who determines by his death absolutely and infallibly to deliver the other from death. What if under any condition he should make deliverance from death possible to guilty men, which without his death was impossible? Would it not be justly affirmed for that reason alone, that he died for them ? Ambrose has asserted, in writing on Cain and Abel, (ii. 3), that Christ came for the salvation of all, and undertook the redemption of all, inasmuch as he brought a remedy by which all might escape, although there are many who impute to themselves the causes of his death, who are unwilling to be healed. We do not, therefore, deny that the particle for in the sacred Scriptures, when used about the death of Christ, sometimes denotes that special intention, according to which deliverance from death and translation into life is infallibly destined to those for whom he is asserted to have died ; but we deny that this is so perpetually or necessarily the case, that the truth of the assertion, Christ died for all, will not stand, unless it is granted that he had an absolute intention of saving all.
[BODY] <!--v2p435-->It appears now that the secret and absolute good pleasure of God concerning the salvation of men, according to the infallible decree of predestination, is not necessary for this purpose, so that Christ may be rightly and truly said to have suffered and died for all. What then is necessary? I will tell youin few words. Forasmuch as the death of Christ has a twofold respect ; one to God, to whom this precious ransom was offered and paid, another to men, for whom it was offered and paid ; Christ may be said to have suffered, to have been offered, or to have died for all, if it should appear that by his death and passion he had effected, that God might be understood to be otherwise disposed as to giving eternal life to all men, than he would have been without the death of Christ ; and also, if it should appear that any man might claim for himself by virtue of the death of Christ, a right to the remission of sins and eternal life, which, without this death, he could not possibly have or claim in any way. Either of these plainly shews, that the efficacy of the death of Christ extends ] itself to the whole human race, and therefore, that we neither speak falsely nor improperly when we say that Christ died for all mankind.
[BODY] <!--v2p435-436-->As to the first, It is certain, that through regard to the death of Christ, the will of God is now otherwise ordered towards all men individually than it would be without it. For by this, that Christ in his own human nature suffered death, without any other intervening medium, it has at least been effected with God, that he is willing to be reconciled to any man who believes and repents, to pardon his sins, and to confer upon him eternal life. Hence, on the part of God, remission was prepared for Cain, if he should do well-and repent. (Gen. iv. 7.) Hence it is said to any wicked man in the name of God himself, If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, he shall surely dive, he shall not die. (Ezek. xviii. 21.) Take away the regard to the death of Christ which is present to the mind of God and which embraces the human race, and there is nothing serious, solid, or true in promises of this kind as to the non-elect. For the conditional promise of remission ought to have its truth in the death of Christ as muchas the remission itself, which is granted on the performance of the condition. Nor does it at all avail to diminish the: universal efficacy which the death of Christ hath obtained with God, that none of the non-elect fulfil the evangelical condition of faith and repentance ; for it is sufficient, that by virtue of the death of Christ, and the ordination of God established through it, if the condition should be fulfilled by any man whatsoever, the benefit of remission and of eternal life would undoubtedly follow.
[BODY] <!--v2p436-437-->Now as to the latter of these, It is also certain and directly connected with it, That any man whatsoever, through the benefit of the death of Christ, may claim to himself this right, that if he should believe, immediately all his sins are blotted out, and he is adopted as an heir of eternal life. For although on account of the want of fulfilment of the condition many cannot actually claim these promised blessings, yet there is no human being to whom they would not abound by virtue of the death of Christ, if the condition were fulfilled by him. This conditional decree of God, established by the death of Christ and revealed in the Gospel, from which we understand that God, by virtue of the passion of Christ, has obliged himself to give remission of sins and eternallife to every one that believeth, and from which an universal right has arisen, not to certain persons in particular, but to any individual of tie human race, to obtain remission of sins under the aforesaid condition, is abundantly sufficient for this purpose, that it may be truly asserted that Christ suffered for all men. Nor is this conditional decree confirmed by the death of Christ and extended to all men, a thing of no value, because the infallible fulfilment of the condition depends upon another secret decree; since that secret decree, inasmuch as it relates to this or the other individual, is altogether unknown to us, and therefore not to be declared to any one by name; but this conditional decree, which comprehends the whole human race, is to be announced to every individual as the most solid foundation of our evangelical doctrine, according to that declaration of the Apostle (Romans x. 8, 9, 11,) This ts the word of faith which we preach, That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. — For the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed. This benefit by virtue of the death of Christ is set before, and to be procured by all men, under the condition of faith ; and in that respect Christ is affirmed to have died for all men. .
[BODY] <!--v2p437-->One thing only now remains; that we should demonstrate that this condition of faith, under which remission of sins and eternal life is promised to all men individually through the death of Christ, is possible.
[BODY] <!--v2p437-438-->We have taught that Christ died for all men, in the sense, that the evangelical covenant was established, through the death of Christ, with the whole human race ; according to which, remission of sins and eternal life is set before all men, under the possible condition of faith. Some persons, fixing the eyes of their mind solely on the secret of predestination and reprobation, cannot conceive how Christ, faith, remission of sins, eternal life, or any spiritual and saving good, can in any way, or under any possible condition, pertain to those who were not included in the number of the predestinated before the foundation of the world; although Christ may be offered to them in the preaching of the Gospel, although faith may be required of them, although remission of sins and eternal life to be obtained through Christ may be promised to them, under the condition of faith. We shall therefore briefly shew,
[BODY] <!--v2p438-->Tuirbty, That this condition of faith, which is required in order that the death of Christ, which was endured for all, may be applied to any person individually, neither is, nor ought to be conceived by us to be altogether impossible to any person living. This, however, is to be remembered, that from the beginning we have inculcated, that this possibility 1s founded on the supernatural assistance which may possibly be received by any one, while he is iu the land of the living, according to that celebrated saying of Prosper of Aquitain (Object. Vincent. Resp. 6), There is this difference between wicked men and devils, that for men, however wicked, a reconciliation is provided, if God should have compassion . upon them; but for devils there is no conversion reserved at all.
[BODY] <!--v2p438-439-->First, then, when we say, that faith thus to believe isa thing possible to any person living, we regard not its active and formal power, as if any one living could of his own free will elicit this act of believing ; but its passive and material power, as it is called, because God may effect in any one that he should be converted and believe the Gospel. For we are said to be able todo any thing in two ways, as Aquinas has well observed, namely, either by the power which is in us, as we say that a stone can be moved downwards ; or by power considered on the part of another, as we say that a stone can be moved upwards, not by its innate power, but by the power of the person who throws it. Quest. disp. De Pred. art. resp. ad 7. According to this mode we affirm that any living person can believe, or that the condition of faith is possible to any one who is in the land of the living, not by any innate power resident in himself, but by the supernatural assistance which can be supplied by God at any time to any man, according to the saying of John the Baptist (Luke iii. 8), I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Therefore there is no heart so obdurate and stony, that it cannot be softened by God, and be turned to faith and repentance. This is what Augustine signified in other words, when he wrote, To be able to have faith is in the nature of men, but to have grace is peculiar to believers. (De Predestinat. Sanctor. cap. 5.) To this also Augustine alluded in his Soliloquies (lib. ii. cap. 1,) where, when he had said, We would believe, if it were in our power, he afterwards subjoins, Our power is God himself.
[BODY] <!--v2p439-440-->Secondly, When we refer this possibility of having faith to the active power of God, and to the receptive power of man, this is to be understood not only of the absolute power of God, but of his ordinary power. For among Divines some things are said to be possible by the absolute power of God, and some things by his ordinary power. It will not be foreign to our purpose to make this distinction, when we have explained it in a few words. That, then, is said to be possible by the absolute power of God, which, from the nature of the thing, does not involve a contradiction if it should be done; that, on the other hand, impossible, which does involve a contradiction. And under this consideration, as Thomas rightly says, (Part. qu. 25, art. 3,) Whatever can have a manner of being is reckoned among these absolute possibles, but among the impossibles, what cannot have a manner of being ; as for instance, whatever implies in itself that it both is and is not, at the same time. That such things are not subject to Divine Omnipotence, does not argue any defect in God. Because, as there is no defect in visual power because it does not apply to that which is not visible, so neither is there a defect in absolute power because it is not extended to that which is not possible. It is sufficient therefore for establishing the omnipotence of God, that it can do whatever is possible to be done. But of those things which are otherwise, it is more properly said, that such things cannot be done, than that God cannot do such things. For this some refer to Luke i. 37, With God nothing shall be impossible, that 1s, whatever can be conceived, even implying a contradiction to what may be supposed by any person, that can be done by God. Therefore the rule of judging what God can do of his absolute power ought to be taken from the thing itself; because where there is not a defect of impossibility on the part of the thing, there is no defect of power on the part of God. But this absolute power is not that which we properly and principally regard in our thesis, but rather that power which we call ordained or ordinary. Now this is understood, as Bannes* rightly says, (In lmo, qu. 23, art. 3, p. 276) in the order of any common law given and promulgated by God, according to which any thing is understood as possible to be done, or not to be done ; or also according to the common course of natural or moral things. In this sense we affirm, howsoever the secret decree of the Divine will concerning the giving or not giving of faith to certain individuals is unknown to us, yet, because there is no common law promulgated by God decreeing the opposite, we ought to declare respecting any living person whatsoever, That the condition of faith and repentance is possible to him, : according to the ordinary power of God; as, on the other hand, we rightly say, that according to his ordained or ordinary power, faith and repentance are impossible to any of the damned. This possibility of having faith, which regards every living person, is confirmed by a threefold argument :
[BODY] <!--v2p440-441-->The first is derived from the Divine mercy ; for, as Prosper says, God takes away from no person (living) the way of correction, nor does he deprive any one of the possibility of good. (Ad Obj. Vine. Resp. 25.) Although he hath established a law respecting the grant of remission of sins and eternal life to every penitent believer. J have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. (Ezek. xxxiii. 11). Therefore, not only according to the absolute power of God, but according to his ordinary power, any unbelieving and impenitent person whatsoever may be endued with true repentance and saving faith. Of the unbelieving Jews, the Apostle truly says» (Rom. xi. 23), God is able to graft them in again. And of all obstinate sinners it is rightly declared in the name of God (Rev. ii. 21), I gave them space to repent, and they repented not. He has so granted to mankind the whole space of this life, that in any moment of it conversion to God may bring salvation to them, according to the celebrated saying of the prophet Ezekiel (xviii. 21, 22), If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, &c. all his transgressions, &c. shall not be mentioned unto him. God hath reserved to himself that according to his ordinary power he can bestow upon any one who is not among the damned in hell, the grace of faith and repentance. Hence it is that we ought not to determine any one to be out of the possibility of salvation whom the patience of God suffers to live.
[BODY] <!--v2p441-442-->Secondly, The same thing may be shewn by an argument deduced from regard to Christ, as the head of the body, to every living person. For although the natural head has no power of influence except over the members joined and united to it, yet this mystical head can act towards members separated from it, and communicate to them quickening grace, by means of which they may become united to it. In which sense Aquinas hath not badly stated, (Part. 3, qu. 9, art. 3,) That Christ is the head of all men, but in different degrees. He is principally said to be the head of those who are united to him by an actual communication of his glory. But in a less degree he is the head of those who, according to the ordinary law of God, may yet be united to him, whether that power be brought into action or not. But of those who have no capability of receiving the influence of Christ, he can in no way be called the head. The damned, and those alone, ought to be considered in this state ; because, according to the promulgated will of God, there is no redemption from hell. Therefore, the possibility of having faith, as to every one who is living in this world, is founded on the virtue of Christ the head being most sufficient to influence them, and on the aforesaid mercy of God, who, according to his common law, is willing to grant the whole space of this life for their reception.
[BODY] <!--v2p442-443-->Thirdly, and lastly, It appears from the different condition of mankind while they are living, and after they have come to the end of life, that the condition of faith and repentance, by which the death of Christ is applicable for salvation to any human being, is possible while they are in this world. From the consent of all Divines, the will of any living person may in this world be turned to that which is good; as, on the other hand, the will of the : damned is in their state immoveably confirmed in evil. This is clearly the case with respect to both. Nobody doubts that after this life the state of wicked men is immoveably fixed and altogether unchangeable. For, as Damascenus rightly says (lib. 2, cap. 4,) What their fall was to angels, such is death to men. If the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be. (Eccles. xi. 3.) On the other hand, the will of men placed in this mortal life may be changed, and their wickedness removed, so that, by the ordinary power of God, any unbeliever may be enlightened, any impenitent may be converted ; in one word, any wicked man may be justified and saved. Whence that exhortation of the Apostle (2 Tim. ii. 25, 26,) In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves ; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, He intimates, therefore, that this may as yet be done, and that it ought to be hoped for by us. Not dissimilar is that declaration of Peter (2 Epist. iij. 9,) The Lord ts long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Augustine says (Epist. 54,) There is no other place for the correction of manners, than in this fe. And Clemens Alexandrinus truly remarks (Strom. lib. 4, p. 235,) While we are in this life there is no time either too late or too soon to obtain the health of the soul. Who shall receive faith and repentance from God before he departs out of this life, and who shall not receive them, is a secret, depending on the will of him who hath mercy on whom he will have mercy. and whom he will he leaves hardened. (Rom. ix. 18.) In the mean time, if we regard the ordinary law of God, we shall rightly say of any persons still continued in this life, as Augustine says (De Pred. Sanct. cap. 5,) Allien have not faith, but the possibility of having faith is common to all.
[BODY] <!--v2p443-->Against this our opinion, which makes faith a condition possible to any living person, and the death of Christ applicable, through that possible condition, to any man, some things may be objected.
[BODY] <!--v2p443-->l. The most common objection is, That power is in vain, which is not brought into action. For to what purpose do we attribute to God an ordinary power to enlighten and convert any living man; to what purpose do we attribute to Christ the head a power of influencing him ; to what purpose do we attribute to any man a power of receiving this influence of saving grace, when it appears that this power is never to be brought into action as to the greater part of men?
[BODY] <!--v2p443-444-->We reply, As far as relates to the power of God, this saying is by no means to be admitted. Because, as Aquinas learnedly observes, (Part. i. qu. 25, art. ii. resp. ad. 2) That is in vain which is ordained for an end which it does not attain: but the power of God is not ordained for any external effect as its end, but is itself rather the end of its own effect. Therefore, although God should not have created the world, nor should save any mortal man, yet the power in God of creating and saving would not be vain or needless. Fora like reason that power is not in vain in God or in Christ, by which he is able, according to a law made and promulgated by himself, to bestow upon any living man the grace of faith and repentance, although he will not vouchsafe that grace to multitudes of the human race. Now as to the receptive power, which God hath willed should extend to all men, even to the very close of this life, a power of this kind would indeed be in vain, unless it should be effectual in some persons; but that it is not effectual as to all mankind, is to be referred partly to the secret will of God, partly to the manifest depravity of men. In both respects, through the capacity or power of faith and salvation, which is not effectual as to many, God obtains a greater manifestation of his mercy towards the elect, and of his justice towards the wicked, unbelieving, and impenitent of mankind ; and therefore such power is not granted to them in vain. Alvarez* well says, (De Auxiliis, disp. 105) In order that any power may not be in vain, it 1s not required that it should sometimes be exerted in some action which it can effect, but tt is sufficient that it may be exerted in some one or more of them. For as no one could truly.say, that power was given in vain to men by nature to understand Mathematics, although many who are capable of learning them, do not actually find masters to'instruct them ; so can no man affirm that this power to believe and repent is granted in vain to all living men by the fixed law of God, although God does not effectually work in all men faith and repentance.
[BODY] <!--v2p444-445-->2. It is also objected, that it seems to cause greater doubts in the mind, that God should not only have foreknown from eternity, but have predestinated to whom he would infallibly give faith, remission, and eternal life, and to whom he would not give it. But God cannot do other things in time, or act otherwise than he foreknew from eternity and decreed that he would act. Abelard} formerly relying on this argument, boldly asserted, That God could not possibly do any thing beside those things which he has done, or is about to do. (Wal. doct. fidei, Tom. 2, lib. i. cap. 1.) If this should be true, since it is certain as to the greater part of men, that God neither foreknew nor decreed that faith should be produced in them, yet there is no reason why we should say that this condition of faith is possible in any way as to the non-elect, although they are living in this world.
[BODY] <!--v2p445-446-->We reply, It is most true that God neither does nor permits any thing, without his eternal decree and eternal foreknowledge preceding. But if any one should from thence conclude that God cannot do any thing according to his ordinary power, except those things which he hath foreknown and decreed should be done, it is most false. For as our Hales rightly says, (Part. 1, qu. 21, art. 4, memb. 2) The Divine power 1s not limited either by the will or the foreknowledge of God, although his foreknowledge and will always accompany the manifestation of Divine power in action. Aquinas gives the reason of this sufficiently plain, (Part. 1, qu. 25, art. 5, ad 1) namely, Because his act is subject to the foreknowledge and ordination of the doer, but not his ability to do that which is according to nature. For God does any thing, because he will, but it is not because he will, that therefore he is able to do it, but because he is able in his own nature. Aquinas likewise answers the aforesaid objection in form, (Quest. disp. de potentia Dei, art. 5, resp. ad 1"*) His words are as follows: This saying, THAT GOD CANNOT DO ANY THING BESIDES WHAT HE HATH FOREKNOWN THAT HE WOULD DO, is twofold; because the exceptive particle BESIDES refers either to the power which is denoted by the word can, or to the act which is denoted by the word no. If it is referred to the first of these, the saying is false ; for God can do more things than he foreknew that he would do. If to the second, then the meaning 1s, that it cannot be that any thing should be done by God, which zs not foreknown by God. Thus the saying is true, but this meaning is nothing to the purpose. But since some persons so totally apply themselves to the contemplation of the eternal and secret will and foreknowledge of God, that they admit hardly any thing else into their minds, we will shew briefly, that neither the Scriptures, nor the fathers, nor reason itself, permit that we should determine according to these secret and eternal decrees of predestination, what is possible or impossible with God according to his ordinary power.
[BODY] <!--v2p446-->We will begin with the Scriptures ; which do not confine the power of God according to the secret decrees of his will, but extend it according to his infinite might, and according to the rule revealed in the word. (Matt. iii. 9,). God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. (Mark x. 27,) With God all things are possible. (Matt. xxvi. 53,) Thinkest thou not that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? (Mark xiv. 36,) All things are possible unto Thee, take away this cup from me. Thus also the Apostle speaks of the rebellious Jews, God is able to graft them in again (Rom, xi. 23.) And of any fallen man, Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant ? to his own Master he standeth or folleth : yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand (Rom. xiv. 4.) And lastly, of every living man it is true, God is able to make all grace abound toward him (2 Cor. ix. 8.) I mention no more; from these it appears sufficiently, that we are not to judge of the power of God from his secret decrees: for he did not decree of stones to raise up children to Abraham, nor to deliver Christ from the hands of the Jews, nor to raise up and make to stand every fallen man, nor to shed theabundance of his grace on every one ; yea, he decreed and foreknew that he would not do all these things, which nevertheless (if we are willing to attend to the holy Scriptures), are not on that account to be esteemed impossible.
[BODY] <!--v2p446-447-->Augustine, on this opinion, The Omnipotent Will can do many things which he neither wills nor does, urges the case of Judas, without controversy a reprobate, and says, The Lord, who raised Lazarus in the body, could he not raise Judas in mind? — He could indeed, but he would not. What Augustine does not fear to affirm concerning Judas, we boldly affirm concerning any living person, notwithstanding the secret will and foreknowledge of God of the opposite, namely, that God can raise any one in mind, that is, can give repentance, and faith, and saving grace; because he hath not revealed concerning any particular person, that he will not do this, and of any one whatever he hath revealed that he can do this by his ordinary power, while he is in the land of the living. To this will we ought to submit ourselves, and not to conjecture about the possibility or impossibility of things according to his will, altogether unknown to us.
[BODY] <!--v2p447-->Lastly, Reason itself teaches, that God's ordinary power is not to be confined by the secret decrees of eternal pre destination. First, Because we human beings perceive that our power is not to be limited according to the pleasure of our will. He who hath most firmly determined with himself not to give alms to a certain person, does not on that account lose the power of giving; and on the other hand, he who hath determined to give to another, hath not for that reason taken away from himself the power of not giving. For, as he freely willed one of these opposite things when he might have willed the other, so also he freely does the one without losing the power of doing the other. If this is the case with man, whose power is mutable, and liable to be lost, how much more with God, whose power is immutable, eternal, and always the same.
[BODY] <!--v2p447-448-->Secondly, Because if we make the ordinary power of God to be bound, and as it were circumscribed by his eternal and secret decrees, we cannot seek any thing from God with a certain faith, I will not say that he will, but that he can help us. For instance, If I should perceive myself to be assaulted by Satan with some grievous temptation, I cannot go to God with an assurance of faith, as if he were able to deliver me, because it is uncertain to me what he hath decreed from eternity respecting this thing. Fora ' like reason we cannot pray to God that he would convert any unbelievers to the faith, or that he would bring any wicked men to repentance, with a full persuasion that he can do that which we ask, because what he hath secretly decreed concerning these things before the foundation of the world is concealed from us.
[BODY] <!--v2p448-->Thirdly, and lastly, Because if nothing else is judged possible to be done, except those things which God hath decreed to be done, it would follow that the Divine power is not infinite. That power is finite which is equalized with finite effects, and is wholly drawn out into its own act. Since as Hales rightly observes, (Part. 1. qu. 21) Infinite power may be drawn out into its act, but not the whole of it. Therefore, God can do many things which he will not, as for instance, he can give faith to justify, ' and save any individual person whatever. Yea, he can will many things which he does not will; and yet his will cannot zn any way be either new or mutable. But although he could will what he never hath willed, yet he cannot will unwillingly, or with a new will, but only with an eternal will. For he can will what he could have willed from eternity. For he has the power of willing, both now and from eternity, that which nevertheless he neither does now will, nor hath willed from eternity. Thus Lombard hath rightly remarked (Lib. 1, Dist. 43. Litera E.)
[BODY] <!--v2p448-->We have thought that these things should be discussed rather at length, that it may more plainly appear that the death of Christ is applicable to any man living, because the condition of faith and repentance is possible to any living person, the secret decree of predestination or preterition in no wise hindering or confining this power either on the part of God, or on the part of men. They act, therefore, with little consideration who endeavour, by the decrees of secret election and preterition, to overthrow the universality of the death of Christ, which pertains to any persons whatsoever according to the tenor of the evangelical covenant. Thus much we have said respecting our second proposition. Let us proceed to the third.
[H1] 5|CHAPTER V
[H2] THE THIRD PROPOSITION IS STATED; ILLUSTRATED AND CONFIRMED
[BODY] <!--v2p449-->WE have now discussed our two first propositions, in which we have explained in what sense the death of Christ is to be acknowledged as an universal cause of salvation to mankind; and it has also been shewn, that they do not rightly understand the commonly received axiom of Divines, That Christ died for all sufficiently, but for the elect effectually, who, while they admit the mere sufficiency of the thing considered in itself, yet at the same time exclude its ordained sufficiency, which pertains through the will of God to all men individually, according to the tenor of the Evangelical covenant, under the possible condition of faith. But since, on the other hand, some are found who improperly extend this universal virtue and ordination of the death of Christ, which is to be considered on this account alone, viz. because Christ offered himself upon the cross for all mankind ; a third proposition is to be added, which may define the limits to which it extends itself, and beyond which this universal virtue of the death of Christ, which embraces the whole human race, and which arises from the passion of Christ alone, considered without respect to any other medium, does not extend itself.
[BODY] <!--v2p449-->The third proposition is as follows ;
[BODY] <!--v2p449-450-->The death or passion of Christ, as the universal cause of the salvation of mankind, hath, by the act of its oblation, so far rendered God the Father pacified and reconciled to the human race, that he can be truly said to be ready to receive into favour any man whatever, as soon as he shall believe in Christ ; yet (he aforesaid death of Christ does not place any one, at least of adults, in a state of grace, of actual reconciliation, or of salvation, before he believes.
[BODY] <!--v2p450-451-->Of this proposition there are two members, which we shall handle separately and confirm by arguments, when we have premised a few remarks concerning the word reconciliation for the clearer understanding of the whole business. It is to be observed then, that God being offended at the sin of man, not only deprived him of his paternal favour and adjudged him to eternal death ; but, moreover, irrevocably decreed that he would on no account ever be reconciled to us, whatsoever we might at any time either do or suffer of ourselves. As the displeasure of God was contained in these two steps as it were, so our reconciliation is accomplished by two others, answering to these, as it were, on the opposite side. "The first step of reconci-. liation is then understood to be made, as soon as that is done, although not by us, yet in our name, by which the Divine will is inclined, so that he is now willing to return into favour with us, on the performance of some certain condition, and to bestow remission of sins and eternal life. We affirm that this step to reconciliation is procured for all men by the virtue and merit of the sufferings of Christ, without any other medium. And hence it is (as we have noticed above) that the death of Christ exhibits the redemption or reconciliation of the whole world: God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, (2 Cor. v. 19.) On which opinion Prosper says (Ad Capit. Gallor. obj. 9), The Redeemer of the world gave his blood for the world, &c. See also Augustine's Epistles, 151, 171, 173. — This reconciliation of the world is, therefore, as it were the first step to the actual reconciliation of individuals, to none of whom would an access to this Divine favour have been opened under the condition of faith, unless it had come to pass that God had been in some way reconciled to the human race by the death of Christ, The latter step to reconciliation consists in this, and is judged to be acquired by any individual person when, the condition of faith in Christ being performed, he is received into the paternal favour of God, he is justified, and is presented with an hereditary right to eternal life. To this latter step no one comes by the work of Christ alone, by his having offered up himself on the cross to God the Father; but it is necessary, before he obtains this actual reconciliation, to add the act or work of the man himself believing in Christ the Redeemer, and applying the merit of his death to himself individually by faith. To this may be referred John viii. 24, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. Therefore the death of Christ does not deliver from death, nor ac- : tually reconcile to God any individual person, except he believe.
[BODY] <!--v2p451-->Having made this distinction or explanation of the word reconciliation, let us return to our proposed thesis, the first member of which, to be confirmed by us in the first place, is thus expressed: By the act of the death of Christ, God is so far reconciled to every man, that he is ready to admit any one into favour, and moreover, to eternal life, if he should only believe. We shall discuss this matter in the fewer words, because all that we have said respecting the universal covenant confirmed by the death of Christ, on condition of faith, has regard to this subject. We shall, nevertheless, add some remarks.
[BODY] <!--v2p451-452-->First, then, the very tenor of our preaching of the Gospel demonstrates this. For what else do we preach to wicked men, and those who are as yet unbelieving, but that it has been brought about by the death of Christ, that the will of God is far different towards the human race, than it would have been without this death? In other words, that just God who, without the blood of the Mediator, breathed nothing else than wrath and death against us all individually, being now pacified by the blood of the Redeemer, is ready to grant pardon and life to all individually who humble themselves before him and believe in the Mediator. God would never have commanded his ministers to preach this to mankind promiscuously, unless he had been really so disposed in mind; since the Gospel is the word of truth, (Col. i. 5) because it announces nothing false or vain to sinners. But it pronounces and promises that God is so far pacified by the efficacy of the blood of Christ shed upon the cross, that he is ready to embrace any sinner whenever he shall repent and believe. Therefore, the unreasonable speculation of election and reprobation being set aside, the aforesaid efficacy of the death of Christ as to all men individually ought to be acknowledged, and to be preached to all promiscuously.
[BODY] <!--v2p452-453-->Secondly. The actual reconciliation of every individual person, which is promised and exhibited to every one that believeth, on account of the merit of Christ crucified, presupposes the first degree of reconciliation; by which God is understood to be so pacified by the death of Christ, that he is now willing, ou the performance of the condition of faith, to restore any sinner to his favour. Those therefore who confess that any person, however loaded with sins, as soon as he believes is received into favour on account of . the death and merit of Christ, ought not to deny that this is effected by the death of Christ as to all men individually, that they may account God to be ready, yea, obliged to grant this benefit to any one on the aforesaid condition. The antecedent is confirmed, because we cannot conceive that the act of reconciliation proceeds, or is terminated as it were, by a perpetual law, in any person who believes at the very moment in which he apprehends the Mediator by a true faith, unless at the same time we suppose and acknowledge the Divine will to be so prepared and predisposed, by the death of Christ, that he is inclined to grant this favour to any person, provided he should believe. I perceive that this propensity or readiness of the Divine will to grant pardon and grace to any man, as soon as he should perform the condition of faith, 1s expressed by some persons by the word placability or reconciliability. Why some Divines so superciliously reject this placability or reconciliability, obtained by the passion of Christ, considered in itself alone, I do not understand. For God would not be actually pacified and reconciled to any man, as soon as he should believe, that is, on the performance of the condition of faith, unless he were placable and reconcileable to any man before he should believe, that is, when the condition of faith should be performed. 444 A DISSERTATION ON THE DEATH OF CHRIST.
[BODY] <!--v2p453-->Objection. Here some Divines object to us, Then, according to our opinion, God will not be reconciled and pacified to any sinner through and on account of the death of Christ, but only reconcileable and placable: man also by the death of Christ is not reconciled to God, but is reconcileable under some certain condition, namely, of faith.
[BODY] <!--v2p453-->I answer; that the consequence is faulty. God is reconcileable by the death of Christ to any man who is about to believe: Therefore he is not reconciled through Christ to every one that believeth, but only is reconcileable. Truly, we profess that God is reconcileable to every man that believeth, through and on account of Christ; and also that he has given this condition of faith, by means of which actual reconciliation is acquired through and on account of Christ. In vain then, and falsely do they argue from the position of an universal benefit, namely, of reconciliability, on performing the condition of faith, to the removal or denying of particular benefits, as of reconciliation and salvation, since both are derived from the death and merit of Christ; although those general benefits are performed without any act of ours intervening ; those particular ones, not without any act of ours, although not on account of any act of ours.
[BODY] <!--v2p453-->It is objected, secondly, which seems to be of greater importance, If we say that God is, by the death of Christ, made so placable and reconcileable to every man, that he is ready to receive any one into favour, if he should believe, but is not actually reconciled to any one before he believes, then we seem to make the virtue of the death of Christ, as to itself, of little importance to offer itself to all; and God himself also to be indifferent towards all, and as it were to wait for the determination of an inferior cause, that the death of his Son may be beneficial or otherwise; which is nothing else than with the Semipelagians to suspend the salvation or perdition of individuals on the free-will of each, according as they, by faith, apprehend or reject Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p453-455-->I answer, that in order to its being assumed that God by the death of Christ is so far pacified or placable to mankind, that he will receive into favour any one who should believe, without respect of persons, (which are the very words of the Gospel) yet it does not from thence follow, that this difference of believers and unbelievers, of reconciled and unreconciled, of saved and lost, is to be referred to the uncertain determination of the human will. For he who promulgated this universal decree of the Gospel, he that believeth shall be saved, nevertheless hath reserved to himself the special privilege of giving faith to some of his special mercy, and of his not giving it to others of his non-pleasure and on account of their manifest unworthiness. By virtue of the death of Christ, God had bound himself to be reconciled to every man who shall believe; but he hath not bound himself to bestow effectual grace on every man, by which it should be infallibly effected : that he should believe. We therefore defend both these things, namely, that God is so far pacified by the death of Christ, that he is now ready to receive into favour any persons whatsoever, if they repent and believe in Christ, and that the same God, who is ready on condition of faith to grant the grace of remission equally to all men, yet has not so provided, that he should conduct himself equally towards all men, as to produce in them this condition of faith. A merchant is said to be ready to sell his wares, if any one is willing to buy them; but that one should be willing and another unwilling to buy them, is not caused by the merchant, but depends on the will of each. The matter is not so between God and us. For although, by virtue of the death of Christ, he is now ready to give remission, and to bereconciled to any man who will believe in Christ, yet it is God’s own peculiar prerogative to inspire into all who believe the will of believing. We do not, therefore, join with the Semipelagians, but we say with the Arausican fathers,* (Can. 6) Jf any one says that the mercy of God is bestowed upon those that believe, will desire and knock without the grace of God, and does not confess that it is through the Divine power that we believe and will, by the infusion and inspiration of the Holy Spirit in us, he opposes the saying of the Apostle, Bv THE GRACE oF God I am wHAT I am. So much for the first part of our proposition; I come now to the other, which is framed in this manner :
[BODY] <!--v2p455-->The death of Christ, considered as the.general cause of the salvation of mankind, delivers no one among adults from the guilt and punishment of their sins ; makes no one actually reconciled to God ; in one word, places no one in a state of grace and salvation before they believe the Gospel. For the explanation of this proposition, I will premise these few things :
[BODY] <!--v2p455-456-->The first is, That by the death of Christ, generally constdered as the cause of the salvation of mankind, we mean nothing more than the consideration of our Lord's passion in its immediate effect, which it produces of itself, without any concurrence of human actions. We affirm that the immediate effect which is produced, without any thing requisite on our part, is reconciliability, which is brought into action as soon as we believe; but not actual reconciliation, or being placed in a state of adoption and salvation, before we believe. Another thing which we think should be premised, refers to some difference to be observed in this matter between adults and infants. For it was said, that none among adults is reconciled to God, or delivered from the guilt of his sins without the act of faith; (which will be proved hereafter). From whence it is evident, that we admit that some among infants are, by virtue of the death of Christ, absolved from their sins, and placed in a state of salvation without any act of their own will. For as they cannot by faith apply the blood of Christ to cleanse their souls, the God of mercy, by the secret operation of his own Spirit, as it were, sprinkles and quickens their souls by the blood of Christ. This is well observed by Aquinas (Quest. disp. de Justific. art. 3,) Because children, says he, have no means whereby they can turn themselves to the justifying cause, the justifying cause itself, namely, the passion of Christ, is applied to them in baptism, and by this they are justified.
[BODY] <!--v2p456-->The last thing is, By the state of grace and salvation. When we deny, that it is attained by any adult before he apprehends the Mediator by the act of faith, we mean that state which the Psalmist has described (Ps. xxxii.) when he says, Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; the same as the Apostle describes (Coloss. i. 13, 14) where he says, that they were delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of Gotl’s dear Son, and had redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.
[BODY] <!--v2p456-458-->It is necessary to prove this proposition thus explained, both against those who assert, that by the merit of the passion of Christ all men are received into a state of grace and salvation, and against those who think that the elect at least were from eternity reconciled, justified, and had their sins pardoned. Some attribute the first opinion to the Remonstrants ; but, as it appears to me, although they speak ambiguously and obscurely, they are free from this error. Some persons say (Colloq. Hagiens. p. 9) That Christ by his death upon the cross merited for all men reconciliation and remission of sins. But they add, yet so, that none are really partakers of this remission, except those who believe. Thus they say elsewhere (p. 131,) That Christ by the death of the cross obtained for all men reconciliation and remission of sins. But they immediately add this gloss, That the real participation of this obtained reconciliation and remission is peculiar to those that believe. And in pp. 162, 163, they expressly reject that opinion which is attributed to them by some persons, namely, That all men are by the death of Christ restored from the fall, and replaced in a state of grace. Nor by remission obtained for all, do they mean any more than that by the death of Christ the means and way is now procured and established, which being made use of and applied by faith, all men individually may obtain remission of sins (p.186). Thus they soften down and explain the words which seemed more suspicious in the conference at the Hague.* Yet it is to be confessed that some of them have proceeded a little further in this affair: Dorreus, with Arminius, contends, That God hath taken the whole human race into the grace of reconciliation (Resp. ad artic. 13, 14). Arnold against Tilenust also seems to be of the same opinion (pp. 232 and 261). Huberus and Puccius (whose writings, I confess, I have not yet seen) profess every where that they taught, that by the death of Christ all men individually were justified and restored to the friendship and Javour of God (Act. Synod. Dordr. p. 1, 8). Now as to the latter opinion, I do not remember to have read of any one of our people who expressly defends it. But our Thomson} in his Diatribe (cap. 24, p. 92 and 99) mentions some persons who endeavour to prove that through the dignity and efficacy of the merits of Christ, the sins of the elect were pardoned from eternity. If this were granted, it would follow that these persons were justified, reconciled to God, and restored to a state of grace and salvation before they believed in Christ, which is most false. The proof of our proposition will be a refutation of both these errors. Therefore we shall confirm it in the first place by testimonies of the Scriptures.
[BODY] <!--v2p458-->First. That remission of sins does not immediately flow from the passion of Christ to all men universally, without some act of ours intervening, is proved by all those testimonies of the Scriptures which expressly require beforehand the act of repentance. Such as Ezek. xviii. 21, Jf the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, &c. he shall surely live, he shall not die. Luke xxiv. 46, 47, It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, 1 John 1. 9, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. From which it : appears, that although Christ died for all, yet all do not immediately live through this death of Christ, but that all live as soon as they repent: although remission of sins is offered in the name of Christ, yet all men promiscuously are not made partakers of this benefit, but the penitent alone ; and by the same law, that repentance precedes remission. And, although by virtue of the death of Christ, God is bound to remit sins, yet it is in such a way, that neither the faithfulness nor the justice of God requires that this remission should be granted to any one, except on this condition, If he should confess his sins.
[BODY] <!--v2p458-459-->Secondly, The same is evinced by those passages which, before we can be justified or reconciled to God, previously require faith from us, as the instrument by which we apprehend the grace of justification, and as the condition of obtaining reconciliation, commanded to us in the Evangelical covenant. Of this kind are Acts xvi. 31, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. John vi. 40, This is the Father's will which hath sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life. John xx. 31, These are written that ye might believe, &c. and that believing, ye might have life through his name. Rom. il. 22, The righteousness of God is, by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe: and ver. 25, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, &c. Gal. ii. 16, Knowing that a man is not justified but by the faith of Christ, we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith of Christ. I omit other passages innumerable. From these it appears abundantly, That remission of sins, and justification, or our reconciliation with God, is not a benefit which redounds to any man from the passion of Christ himself, without any other means ; but that those for whom Christ died, whether sufficiently or effectually, cannot have the saving benefit of his death applied to them, unless by faith preceding.
[BODY] <!--v2p459-->Thirdly. This may also be collected from those sayings of the Scriptures in which, the death of Christ being presupposed, it is nevertheless affirmed, that some men lie under the penalty of death, and the wrath of God, even so long as until they apprehend the Mediator with a true faith. To this these passages relate. Mark xvi. 16, Preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believeth shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. John iii. 36, He that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wraih of God abideth on him. John viii. 24, If ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in your sins. Lastly, notwithstanding Christ died for us, the Apostle hath said, Eph. ii. 3, We all were by nature the children of wrath. ln vain, therefore, do any dream, that by the death of Christ all men are restored to the Divine favour and a state of salvation, without the intervention of any act on our part.
[BODY] <!--v2p459-460-->Fourthly. Lest any one should say that the aforesaid testimonies relate only to the non-elect, but that all the elect stand justified and reconciled to God by the merit of the death of Christ, before they believe, let them hear these plain testimonies of the Scriptures to the contrary. Ephes. ii. 11, 12, 18, Remember that ye in time past were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world; but now, in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. He addresses those whom (chap. i. 4) he assumes to have been chosen before the foundation of the world; yet he teaches that until that time they had remained strangers from the covenants of promise, and were alienated from God, until by faith, as a spiritual hand, they appropriated to themselves the riches of Divine grace treasured up in Christ ; as it may readily be collected from ver. 7 and 8 of this Chap. ii. Of the same meaning are those words of the same Apostle, (Rom. v. 1) Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore the death of Christ, considered in itself, until faith is added on our part, does not place any individual in a state of grace. Finally, the Apostle Paul was, without doubt, one of the elect, yet he was not on that account either justified, or brought into a state of grace and salvation, whilst he remained a blasphemer against Christ and a persecutor of the Church, but after he had known Christ and cast himself altogether upon Christ. (1 Tim. 1. 16,) For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Therefore remission of sins through the blood of Christ does not precede faith and repentance, not even in the elect.
[BODY] <!--v2p460-->Hitherto we have contended with express testimonies of the Scriptures, now let us add some arguments founded on the same Scriptures.
[BODY] <!--v2p460-461-->ARGUMENT 1. Although we grant that the death of Christ, as a meritorious cause, is most sufficient to expiate the sins of all men, and place them in a state of grace with God, yet, it cannot actually constitute any man justified and reconciled, unless it be in some way joined, fitted, and united to him who is supposed to be justified and reconciled by it. For what philosophers are accustomed to say, Every action is performed by some contact, avails also in this supernatural action, which is not performed without some supernatural contact. Now we touch Christ by faith and we are joined and as it were united to him by the Spirit of faith. For Christ dwelleth in us by faith. Without faith, then, or before faith, we have no actual union with Christ, and therefore no remission of sins through the merit of his death, no justification, no reconciliation with God the Father. The learned Calvin has observed this on Rom. viii. 4, Christ communicates his righteousness to none but those whom his Spirit unites by a bond to himself. Whatever, therefore, is concealed in the eternal decree of God concerning justifying and reconciling to himself, and at length saving all the elect, whatever of sufficiency or efficacy there may be in the precious blood of Christ to redeem men and reconcile them to God, yet it is not wont to proceed into the effect of actual reconciliation, unless he is first joined to men by faith, because both the meritorious and the natural cause ought to be joined to that into which it flows and transfuses its saving virtue. ARGUMENT 2. [tis proved, secondly, from a comparison between Adam, the author of death and condemnation, and Christ, the Author of life and justification. For as Adam does not bind any under the penalty of death, nor subject any to Divine wrath and condemnation, but those who become his members, as it were, by generation; so Christ does not deliver any from death, nor restore any to Divine favour, or justify and reconcile them to God, but those who become his members by supernatural regeneration. But this does not take place before faith is inspired into our hearts. John i. 12, 13, As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, which were born not of blood, &c. but of God. Therefore no one, either of those who are passed by or of the elect, stands reconciled and justified before God by the death of Christ itself; but at the time when he is incorporated with Christ, and by regeneration is made, as it were, a member of this mystical head, he obtains the righteousness of Christ and peace with God.
[BODY] <!--v2p461-463-->ARGUMENT 3. If by the merit of the death of Christ alone all the sins of men were pardoned before they believe in Christ, and so all were actually restored to a state of grace and reconciliation, it would follow that no one is born a child of wrath ; which is diametrically opposite to the words of the Apostle just now quoted from Ephes. ii. 3. Moreover, since the merit of Christ in the acceptation of God has infinite and eternal efficacy, this inconvenience also would follow, That the sins of men were pardoned before they were committed, were expiated before they were perpetrated, if the remission of sins and actual reconciliation of men arose solely from the merit of Christ, without any intermediate act of ours [by which the benefit is conveyed tous]. But this is plainly impossible. For as a medicine, which as to its own efficacy and virtue may cure the leprosy, yet does not actually heal any man, but a leper who takes it; so the blood of Christ, which can heal any man, yet does not actually heal, or cleanse, or reconcile any man to God, but him who is contaminated with sin and believes. Therefore, they are by no means to be attended to who pretend that all men promiscuously are reconciled and placed in a state of grace by the passion of - Christ itself, or who contend that all the elect, by the virtue alone of the same passion, have all their sins pardoned from eternity, since there is no pardon of sins but of those which are committed, nor any pardon of sins committed to be hoped for by any but by those who believe. Excellently and most truly says the Rev? Bishop of Salisbury,* of pious memory, (in Thoms. Diatr. cap. 2. p. 212,) It ought not to be believed that remission of future sins is now made. For although indeed in the sight of God those things which he hath from all eternity ordered to be done, arc as though they were now done, yet they are not. otherwise to be received by us than according to that mode of dispensation by which his decrees from eternity are both accomplished to us in time and are actually brought to pass. Thus far this author. Remission of sins is not then to be dreamt of, nor reconciliation to be pretended except according to the maimer of the dispensation decreed by God ; that is, unless we first truly repent and believe in the Mediator.
[BODY] <!--v2p463-465-->ARGUMENT 4. The whole virtue and efficacy of that merit which Christ by his death procured for the benefit of the human race, as to its efflux and derivation to other persons, depends on the will of the Father in ordaining and accepting it. For who dare take to himself the merit of Christ in another way or on another condition than God himself hath ordained that it should be communicated to men and be accepted in their name? Truly, if any one should endeavour to do this, he would do it in vain. For the merit of Christ is a benefit to us only as far as tt was accepted by God, as Scotus hath taught, not disagreeing with this our opinion (lib. 3, Dist. 19, Qu. vine. p. 74.) But it was not accepted by God, that he should procure actual remission of sins and reconciliation for any mortal man before repentance, faith, and ingrafting into Christ. Therefore, he does not actually justify or reconcile to God any but those who repent and believe. But that it was not so accepted that he should reconcile any one before faith, appears from an argument derived from the Scriptures negatively in this manner: No word occurs in the holy Scriptures from which it can be collected that merely by the . virtue and efficacy of the death of Christ all men are promiscuously restored-to a state of grace, or that any man, whether elect or non-elect, before repentance and faith, obtains, by virtue of the blood of Christ shed on the cross, remission of sins, or actual reconciliation with God. Therefore it is rash to assert it. Neither is there any reason why a man should reject an argument of this kind derived from the authority of the Scriptures negatively. For although in lesser matters, which do not relate to the chief cause of our salvation, the reasoning would be weak—This is not laid down in the Scriptures, therefore it is false or unlawful; yet, in things necessary to be done or known in order to salvation, such as the manner of obtaining remission of sins and reconciliation with God, it justly follows, This is not taught w the Scriptures, there- Sore ii is not to be believed by us. Since, therefore, the Scrip-. tures no where teach that remission of sins or actual reconciliation were procured by the death of Christ for any individual before he repents and believes in Christ, it is not to be admitted under the pretext of amplifying the dignity of the death of Christ, or for any other reason. Now, having established this by a weight of arguments, we will also produce the sentiments of the Fathers, yet very few of them. Ambrose, on faith, (ad Gratian. lib. 4, cap. 1) says, Jf thou dost not believe, he descended not for thee, he suffered not for thee. Which words have this meaning, That no benefit of redemption comes from the incarnation and passion of Christ to any individual, until he lelieves in Christ. For Ambrose would not deny that Christ descended and suffered for men, whether they believe or not; but he wishes to teach, that the benefit or saving virtue of this passion, quickens and reconciles men when they believe. Therefore in this form of speaking he follows the known rules of lawyers, who say, That not to be, and to be uselessly, are to be reckoned as equal. Those things which are found to be without effect, may be said /o stand for nothing. Christ, therefore, is denied to have been incarnate and to have died for those who do not believe, because through their fault he is understood to have been incarnate and to have suffered uselessly and without effect. This plainly proves that, according to the opinion of Ambrose, for this reason alone, that Christ died for them that believe, no one is placed ina state of reconciliation and salvation before he possesses faith in the Gospel.
[BODY] <!--v2p465-466-->Augustine follows Ambrose and writes thus, (in Resp. ad artic. sibi falso impos. resp. 1) Those who pass through this life without faith in Christ, and without the sacrament of regeneration, are strangers to redemption. A little after, The property of redemption belongs to those from whose hearts the prince of this world is driven away. Further on he adds, The passion or death of Christ has in itself what may be beneficial to all mankind, but if it is not internally received, it does not profit. All which remarks express in other words the opinion of Ambrose, If thou dost not believe, he descended not for thee, he suffered not for thee. For the phrase, they are strangers to redemption, means nothing more than that those who have not yet believed, are not partakers of remission of sins and reconciliation with God. So also the property of redemption denotes the benefit of redemption acquired and as it were possessed, and declares that it belongs only to those who believe and are regenerate. And lastly, those words of Augustine, if zt is not internally received, wt does not profit, plainly evince that the benefit which redounds from the death of Christ is not derived to individuals, except by internally receiving, that is, by believing. These things altogether and separately overturn the opinion of those who say, either that all men promiscuously, or the predestinated, as it were by a special privilege, are restored to a state of grace and actual reconciliation with God, for this reason alone, that Christ suffered on the cross for them.
[BODY] <!--v2p466-->Thirdly, Theodoret, writing on those words of the Apostle, Rom. iii. 25, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, &c. says, The Lord Christ is the propitiation, and by his blood procured our salvation, requiring only faith from us. From which words we collect, that Christ, with his death and all his merits, is so constituted the universal cause of our redemption, reconciliation, and salvation, that before the benefit of this redemption and salvation procured by Christ is partaken of by any one, it is necessary that this universal cause should be specially applied to each individual. Now that this beneficial application may be made, as Theodoret has well said, God requires faith from us. "Therefore, while faith is absent, the death of Christ, considered in itself, brings no one into a state of actual reconciliation, of grace, and salvation. Cyril is found to be of the same opinion, when (lib. 2, cap. 74) explaining the words of our Saviour, John iii. 36, He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, he says thus, Christ therefore quickeus those who believe in him, because as there is a life according to nature, so he dwells in all the faithful by faith. Therefore, although Christ is life itself, yet he does not quicken any but those who believe, which Cyril confirms by an excellent and forcible argument, namely, because he does not dwell in any but believers. Asif he had said, The fountain of life does not actually quicken any but those who are united to him, and none but believers are considered to be united to him. Those therefore argue badly, who collect, whether from the death or from the life of Christ, either that all, or any, are placed in a state of life, grace, and salvation, before they are united to Christ by the bond of faith.
[BODY] <!--v2p467-->Lastly, The testimony of the venerable Bede is most express, in his Commentaries on 2 Cor. v. 19, The world is reconciled to God by faith, when it believes in Christ, who was sent by God. The Apostle had said, God was tn Christ reconciling the world unto himself, that is, that Christ by the ordination of God paid that ransom to the Father, by which it was effected that God should not demand satisfaction from us for our sins, before he returned into favour with us; but being content with this alone, is ready to receive any one into favour. If you enquire further, whether on the payment of this price all men are immediately reconciled by the act of payment ? Bede answers, By no means ; but every one is THEN reconciled to God, when he believes in Christ, who was sent by God. ‘To the same effect are the words of the same author on Luke xv. TÀen Christ is slain for every one of us, when we believe that he was slain. He was slain from the origin of the world in the Divine acceptalion ; he was slain also when the fulness of time came upon the cross. But he was slain for you and for me, that is, for every individual, when we believe in him that was slain. Which is the same as if he had said, The benefit of the death of Christ belongs to us when we begin to believe in him. They have therefore departed from orthodox antiquity, who assert that all men are placed in a state of grace by the passion of Christ; nor less so they who teach that the predestinated, by this death of Christ, have obtained remission of their sins, or justification and reconciliation with God from eternity ; since this justification or actual reconciliation (as Bernard truly and learnedly remarks) cannot be without the consent of the receiver, any more than without the grace of the Giver. And thus you have our. opinion confirmed and strengthened. We shall now bring forward the objections of adversaries, and remove them in a few words.
[BODY] <!--v2p467-468-->In favour of the opinion of Huber,* who states that all men are restored to a state of grace and salvation, because Christ died for mankind, arguments of this kind are produced :
[BODY] <!--v2p468-->1. The death of Christ was either a sufficient ransom for blotting out the sins of the human race, and placing in his Bibliotheca Theologica Selecta, Vol. II. pp. 645—648, has given an account of Huber's publications, and also of those by his antagonists ; and from this accurate Ecclesiastical Biographer we learn that Huber held the following tenets:—
[BODY] <!--v2p468-->Deum omnes homines in Christo ad felicitatem sempiternam eligisse, nulla ratione habita fidei, sive ea prsediti sint ; sive minus; eo tamen modo, ut decreti hujus veluti mutatio fieret apud illos qui gratiam Divinam adsper. narentur. Cum errore hoc alia prava dogmata conjunxit, praesertim de regeneratione ac justificatione, utramque esse universalem.: omnesque mortales, pios atque;impios, Turcas ac Christianos, propter universum Christi meritum ac per squitatem, veniam peccatorum consequi posse. Walch. Bibl. Theol. Sel. Vol. 1I. p. 645.
[BODY] <!--v2p468-469-->On two former occasions (vide p. 366 and p. 448) Bishop Davenant has cited Puccius in conjunction with Huber. Puccivs (Francesco Pucci or Franciscus Puccius) was descended from an antient Florentine family, and was early distinguished for his love of study. From Lyons, whither he had gone with the design of entering into commerce, and where he cultivated the Society of Literary men, he came into England, and went to Oxford, where he studied Theology, and took the degree of M.A. in 1574. His opposition to the Calvinist party (which at that time was dominant in the University), in his Treatise De Fide in Deum, qua ct qualis sit, procured him many enemies, and finally lost him a Professor's Chair. He then withdrew to Básle, where he became acquainted with Faustus Socinus, to whose opinions he was favourable. The Divines of Basle forced him to quit that city on account of his opinions respecting universal grace, which he proposed in his Thesis entitled-— Universum genus humanum in ipso utero efficaciter particeps esse beneficiorum Christi et vite immortalis et beate, &c. Pucci expected to find more toleration at London ; but scarcely had he arrived there when his extravagant opinions caused him to be thrown into prison. On being liberated he fled into Holland, and corresponded with Faustus Socinus, whom however he opposed, on certain points, in his treatise De Immortalitate naturali primi hominis ante peccatum. After wandering about to various places, in 1595 he held some conferences with the Papal Nuncio then at Prague, and returned to the Romish Church. Some years before, he had dedicated to Pope Clement V III. a Treatise entitled De Christi Salvatoris E fficacitate omnibus et singulis hominibus, quatenus homines sunt, Assertio Catholica, &c. Pucci was subsequently ordained a Priest in the Romish Church, and became Secretary to Cardinal Pompey,jd’Aragon, in whose house he died in 1600. {Biographic Universelle, Tom. XXXVI. pp. 281, 282.) all men in a state of grace and reconciliation; or was insufficient. If it is stated to be insufficient, we extenuate Divine grace, and unworthily trample upon the merit of Christ. If it is acknowledged to be sufficient, then the cause being placed in a sufficient act, nothing else is required to produce the effect. Therefore, from the act of Christ offering up himself to God, immediately follows the universal deliverance of all men from the guilt of their sins, and the universal reconciliation or reception of all men into the Divine favour.
[BODY] <!--v2p469-->Regrriv. We acknowledge the most full sufficiency of the ransom; yea, its infinite superabundance. But we answer, That this merit of Christ, considered in itself, operates indeed sufficiently as an universal cause of the salvation of mankind ; but an universal cause does not produce effects in individuals before there is an individual application. Therefore as Aquinas says (Part. 3, qu. 49, art. 10, & qu. disp. de grat. Chr. art. 7,) By the death of Christ was made a most sufficient universal cause, by means of which all the sins of any person whatever may be expiated ; but before this cause manifests its expiat. ry virtue for the deliverance and reconciliation of individuals, 1l is needful that it should be applied to individuals by faith. Which the Apostle himself hath perspicuously taught, Rom. iii. 25, Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, &c. Therefore, although this death of Christ is a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the human race, yet, since it cleanses us from our sins after the manner of a medicine, it must be applied to each person before it can produce the effect of reconciliation and health. But the application is made only by faith.
[BODY] <!--v2p469-->2. If God should not receive all men into favour after having accepted a sufficient ransom, it would be an act of injustice to Christ, because he does not bestow upon men what Christ by dying merited for them: He would also act unjustly towards men, because he still holds them bound by their sins, as by debts, when Christ hath blotted out all their debts with his blood.
[BODY] <!--v2p469-470-->Reply. Injustice is not done to either. Not to Christ, because he would not that the satisfaction made by him for the sins of the human race, should avail to the actual reconciliation of individuals, without the intervention of their faith, as it was proved before. It would therefore be reproachful to Christ, if any one should be admitted into the fellowship and actual participation of this grace, who does not believe in Jesus Christ the Author of salvation, and our Redeemer. Nor is injustice done to men, that they are not immediately received into the favour of God on account of the act of Christ in dying, because this was neither due nor promised to mankind. For we cannot claim for ourselves any benefit from the death of Christ contrary to and in addition to the order and covenant made by God and Christ, and laid open to us in the Gospel. Now this is the established order, this condition is expressly stated in the Gospel; that the grace of reconciliation and the benefit of eternal life should redound to sinners from the death of Christ, if they should believe: But if not, they should remain under the guilt of their sins, and should perish in their unbelief. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him. (John ui. 36.)
[BODY] <!--v2p470-->OBJECTION 3. There was not greater force in the sin of Adam to bind all men under the penalty of eternal death, than in the death and merit of Christ to absolve all men, to reconcile them to God, and to restore them to a state of grace and salvation. Thus the act of Adam binds all men under the guilt of sin, and subjects them to Divine wrath: Therefore, the act of Christ dying ought to deliver all men from death, to reconcile them to God, and to place them in a state of grace and salvation.
[BODY] <!--v2p470-472-->REPLY. In this argument is involved a false supposition. In the major proposition it is as it were taken for granted, that the efficacy or virtue of any cause is always to be estimated greater or less according as it extends itself to more or fewer subjects ; which is very false. For the efficacy or excellence of a cause is to be estimated from the nature and excellency of its effects rather than from their multitude. For instance; It is a proof of greater virtue and excellence to restore sight to one blind man than to put out the eyes of a thousand men; to heal one maimed and diseased man, than to mutilate or poison a thousand whole and healthy men; in a word, to recal one man to life, than to put a thousand to death. For a like reason, the power of Christ by his death is greater and more efficacious in the salvation of only one man, than that of Adam in destroying by his sin the whole human race. To the minor proposition it may also be answered, That the act of the sin of Adam does not bind any man under the penalty of death, or render him obnoxious to the wrath of God, unless from hence, that he was propagated from sinful Adam by natural generation. And in the same manner evidently the act of the death of Christ does not deliver any man from a state of death or from Divine wrath, any further than he is derived from Christ by a supernatural regeneration. Therefore the condition is equal on both sides, if a just comparison be made. All who are naturally descended from Adam have lost the grace of God and eternal life. All who are supernaturally regenerated by Christ recover the grace of God and eternal life. No man is subjected to death or Divine wrath by the fault of the sin of Adam, unless he has derived a natural origin from him. No man is delivered from death or Divine wrath through the merit of the death of Christ, unless he has derived from him a heavenly birth. This is wisely and learnedly explained by Aquinas (Contra Gentil. lib. 4, cap. 55,) where he has these words, The effect of the sin of our first parent cleaves to every one by his fleshly origin ; so the effect of the death of Christ pertains to every one by spiritual regeneration. He who desires that the merit of Christ may be beneficial to him, seeks to be regenerated by the Spirit of Christ. If any one should still urge, That to be propagated from Adam, whence wrath and the penalty of death follows, is common to all men; why is it not in the same manner stated, that to be regenerated by Christ, on which depends our reconciliation and salvation, is common to all men? To this I shall merely answer, That God himself was unwilling that those things which flow to men in the way of grace, should be as common to all as those things which are derived to men in the way of nature. He willed that his grace should make men differ from each other, and therefore he would not make it equally common to all men. Augustine has noticed this (De Preedest. Sanct. cap. 5), which consult at your leisure. Let no one then murmur against God, because by the operation of his special grace he regenerates some, and unites them to Christ by faith; let no one enquire why he delivers one man rather than another: since this answer of God himself is sufficient to stop the mouth of any, (Matt. xx. 15) Is i£ not lawful for me to do what 1 will with mine own? &c. And that of the Apostle, (Rom. ix. 18) He hath mercy on whom he will, See also Augustine (De bono persev. cap. 8.) Therefore, although as to its sufficiency, the death of Christ has regard equally to all men; yet as to its efficacy, it depends on the Divine election, that the effects of the merits of Christ are mercifully applied to any, while, through the impediment of their own unbelief, they are not applied to others.
[BODY] <!--v2p472-->Hitherto we have answered those who contend for the universal and actual reconciliation of all men individually: Now let us hear what may be brought forward by those who assert that the elect are, by the efficacy of the death of Christ, justified and reconciled to God from eternity.
[BODY] <!--v2p472-473-->OBJECTION 1, Those who assert that God is only placable and reconcileable to the elect, and not actually reconciled and pacified before their faith and repentance, seenr to place acts and powers in God, and to admit that God can be what he is not: But God is a pure act and altogether immutable: Therefore it is impossible that he should now be what he was not before: If then he is reconciled to Peter or Paul, after they are known to repent and believe, he was also reconciled to them from eternity. For it may seem to be granted of itself, that any change in God, who is a most pure act, and in every way most simple, is a variation. But that this is most foreign from the Divine nature, which is free from all kinds of mutability, no one in his senses will deny: especially since it seems not only consonant to the dictates of right reason, and agreeable to the decrees of the sounder philosophy, which teaches that the same by the same always does the same, that is, that the same thing being done in the same way always produces the same effect; but also may be confirmed and established by not a few, and those most beautiful passages of the holy Scriptures, as from that testimony of the prophet Malachi (iii. 6,) For I am the Lord, I change not; according to Junius, I, Jehovah, change not. Also of Numbers xxiii. 19, God ?s not a man, that he should lie; nor the son of man, that he should change. A passage plainly like to this is brought from the epistle of the Apostle St. James (i. 17), Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. There is so far from being any change in God, that in him there is not even the least shadow of turning. But if it could be affirmed of God, that at one time he is placable, at another time pacified ; at one time only reconcileable, at another reconciled, it might truly be doubted, and not improperly, whether God is always like himself, and always is disposed evidently in the same manner. For placability seems to intimate only some previous disposition and inclination to future pacification and reconcileability, a facility and propensity in God to reconciliation, which is brought into action towards believing men from his power.
[BODY] <!--v2p473-475-->Reply. That God is reconcileable to any elect person before his faith and repentance, and is actually reconciled to him after his faith and repentance, does not more argue a change in God from act to power, than this man’s not being justified until he believes and his being actually justified after he believes, argues a changeableness in God ; or than his sins being remissible, and after his repentance being actually forgiven, proves a temporary change of the Divine essence or will from power to act. For no man could truly say, because Paul was justified when he believed in Christ, but was not justified while he was a blasphemer against Christ, that therefore a change took place in God ; therefore, neither because at one time he was reconcileable to God, at another time actually reconciled: since to be justified and to be reconciled to God are altogether the same, or at least are inseparably connected. But that we may remove this scruple more clearly, we must observe, that although nothing absolute can anew be added to God without his changing, yet infinite relative denominations may anew, and according to difference of time, at one time be predicated of God, and at another time not be predicated of him ; the Divine essence and will all the while remaining without any shadow of turning. For those things of a mutable and temporary kind which are affirmed of God, are not so affirmed on account of any change. taking place in God, but according to the change which happens to the creature. For instance, It may be truly said, That Adam was creatable by God, when it could'not be truly said, That Adam was created by God. In like manner, Adam is justifiable before God, or Adam is reconcileable to God, might be said before his actual repentance, when it could not be said, Adam is actually justified and reconciled to God. Notwithstanding we do not apply to God acts and powers, or any kind of mutability ; because these things are spoken of God in a different way, not of any change which takes place in himself, but of the change of a creature, which is from him. For as Albertus learnedly remarks, (Tract. 4. qu. 21, de Immutab. Dei.) In those things which are done essentially, he acts in one way, and it ts not said, that he acts now and not before, except so far as he has acted now and not before. Nor do we think that there is any new or temporary act in the will of God, when we state that he is actually reconciled to any man on believing, to whom before believing he was only reconcileable ; because God does not then begin to will that this believer should be actually reconciled to him, who before he had faith was reconcileable, but from all eternity willed that at that moment he should both believe and be actually reconciled. In the Willer, then, there are not successive changes, but in the thing willed, and those changes are according to One eternal and most unchangeable will of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p475-->OBJECTION 2. God is actually reconciled to him whom he actually loves, But he loves all the elect from eternity; Therefore he is actually reconciled to them from eternity : Therefore they are also actually reconciled and justified from eternity.
[BODY] <!--v2p475-476-->Reply. A distinction is to be made with Aquinas, that God is said to love in a twofold manner; according to his purpose of communicating his goodness, and according to the act of communication. (In 3, Sent. dist. 19.) The love according to his eternal purpose, which Divines call The love of eternal benevolence, does not make him who is loved in this manner to be esteemed by God as actually justified or actually reconciled; but that he should be reckoned among those who are infallibly to be justified and reconciled. There is, therefore, a different kind of words which denote acts inherent in God and acts which flow from God to us. The former, such as love, election, predestination, are eternal and internal acts of God himself, and from them men are called beloved, elect, predestinated, on account of the secret good pleasure of the Divine will conceived and . hidden in himself. The latter, such as calling, justification, reconciliation, glorification, are external acts, which terminate in the creature in whom they exist, and are as it were received by him; and from these no one is properly said to be called, justified, reconciled, glorified, solely from the secret and eternal purpose of the Divine will, but from the covenanted performance of the same purpose, and from the effect being produced in men. We confess, therefore, the eternal will in God of justifying and reconciling to himself all the elect; but we deny that they ought to be said to have been justified or reconciled from eternity: In the same manner as we acknowledge that there was in God an eternal will of creating the world, and yet we deny that the world was created from eternity. What Zanchius says of the actual remission of sins, we say of the actual reconciliation of the elect, (Thomson. Diatr. p. 96) I¢ is indeed most certain dn. the Divine predestination from eternity ; but it is not actually given on the part of God, nor actually received on the part of man, until he repents and believes.
[BODY] <!--v2p476-->OBJECTION 3. The efficacy itself of the means in some men rather than in others, arises not from the difference of free-will, but from hence, that God was reconciled to all the elect in Christ before the foundation of the world, but to others he was not reconciled: Therefore, we ought not to deny that all the elect are actually reconciled to God before their conversion and faith, since that dispensation derives its origin and the efficacy of the means to produce in them faith and repentance, from their eternal and antecedent reconciliation.
[BODY] <!--v2p476-->Reply. We willingly grant that the infallible efficacy. of the means ordained to salvation does not depend upon the human will, but upon the eternal and special love of God towards his own elect. But we assert that this love does not regard those who are as yet unbelieving and unconverted, otherwise than as a gratuitous purpose of providing for them, that hereafter they should be converted, and justified, and reconciled to God, and infallibly brought to eternal life. It is, therefore, equally false to infer eternal justification, and the eternal reconciliation of the elect, and their eternal glorification from this eternal love ; since from thence ought to be collected only their certain and infallible justification, reconciliation, and glorification ; which certainty or infallible efficacy of means tending to salvation, arises from the aforesaid love of God, and not by virtue of free-will. If any one pleases to call this love, on which depends the certainty of conversion and reconciliation to be produced in time, actual reconciliation, since God himself calleth those things which be not as though they were, (Rom. iv. 17) I find no fault, provided he allows at the same time that he calls the purpose of the thing to be done by the name of the thing done; because, as Augustine says, It was fixed in the predestination of God that it should take place in his own time. (De Civit, Dei, lib. 12, cap. 16.)
[BODY] <!--v2p477-->OBJECTION 4. Some passages may be produced from the Scriptures which seem to assert, as to the elect, actual and eternal reconciliation with God before their faith and repentance. Ephes.i.4, God is said to have chosen them before the foundation of the world, and ver. 6, to have made them accepted in his beloved Son. ‘They were therefore elected, and actually justified and reconciled, from eternity; for although their reconciliation was made on the part of God when they believed the Gospel, yet that rather then began to be manifested and revealed which had been done from the foundation of the world.
[BODY] <!--v2p477-478-->Rerpty. It is one thing to choose a person to life before the formation of the world, another thing actually to justify and reconcile him to himself before the formation of the world. Election bespeaks in God an eternal will of justifying, reconciling, and saving the person elected ; but of justifying, reconciling, and saving him in his own time by faith. Therefore, the actual justification, reconciliation, and sanctification of the person elected, flows from eternal election, but is not co-eternal with it. It is easy to collect this from the whole discourse of St. Paul in the first chapter to the Ephesians. He affirms (ver. 4) that we were chosen before the foundation of the world, but he does not therefore say, that we were sanctified before the foundation of the world, but, that we were chosen that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Nor does he teach us, that by virtue of eternal election we were justified or reconciled from eternity, but a the dispensation of the fulness of times, (ver. 9, 10, &e.) after having first trusted in Christ, and believed the Gospel which was made known to us. Nor are the words, He hath made us accepted in his beloved Son, opposed to this idea; for the Greek word exapitwcev seems to refer rather to the present state of the elect now regenerate, than to the eternal purpose of God. From whence Beza translates it, Freely he made them acceptable to himself, namely, he freely justified them and admitted them on believing into a state of actual reconciliation. But if any one interprets that acceptance as relating to the eternal love of God, by which he embraces the elect before they were born, that acceptance will denote the purpose of communicating his goodness, not the act of communica tion itself, as was mentioned before from Aquinas. Beza . also, in,his Commentaries on the 5th verse, has rightly observed, That the elect iu due time receive wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption freely by faith; therefore they are not from eternity justified, sanctified, or reconciled, although elected and predestinated from eternity. But no one hath taught this more plainly than the Apostle himself, who demonstrates that the same persons whom he said were chosen before the foundation of the world, yet were by nature the children of wrath (Ephes. ii. 3), and long remained without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. But now, in Christ Jesus, ye who formerly were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, when, through the blood of Christ received: bv faith, they were reconciled to God (ver. 12, 12, &c.) If, therefore, we believe St. Paul, although the election and predestination of mankind proceeds from the eternal love of God, yet it is not to be said, that their eternal justification and reconciliation are manifested and revealed when they believe in Christ, but that they then first take place.
[BODY] <!--v2p478-->Again; The Apostle says (2 Tim. i. 9, 10), That grace was given to the elect in Christ Jesus, before the world began, but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Chiist. But God evidently appears to be reconciled to them, before the world began, to whom he then gave grace in Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p478-479-->REPLy. On account of the unchangeableness and immoveableness of the Divine purpose, that grace is said to be given to the elect before the world began, which was then destined for them. In this passage, therefore, eternal giving is eternal preparation of grace infallibly to be given to the elect in due time. Thus Augustine observes, The Apostle says that grace was given when there were not as yet persons to whom it should be given, because in the disposition and predestination of God, that was now done which was to be done in his own time. (De doctr. Christ. lib. 3, cap. 34.) Thus Junius remarks on these words, He says that the grace was given from eternity, to which we were predestinated from eternity. Nor has Calvin otherwise expounded them ; This gift of grace, says he, of which the Apostle makes mention, is nothing else than predestination, by which we are adopted among the sons of God. A little after, He gave that which, without being induced by merit, he assigned to those who were not yet born, and he had it laid up in his treasures, until he should really manifest that he had appointed nothing in vain. Therefore we rightly deduce from hence, that the grace of justification, reconciliation, and salvation were actually assigned from eternity to all the elect, and, as it were, laid up and reserved for them in the treasury of the Divine love ; but it is not rightly deduced that they were actually conferred upon them before faith and conversion. "The justification and reconciliation of the elect is not said to be opened and manifested when they believe in Christ, but then given and conferred. But what is said to be then revealed and manifested, is the eternal good pleasure or purpose of God concerning the salvation of the elect; which he makes known to us when, the Spirit and faith having been given, we obtain justification and reconciliation with God.
[BODY] <!--v2p479-->There are some other passages brought forward to prove : that our reconciliation with God is not effected at the time when we embrace the Mediator by faith, but that all the elect were reconciled to God from eternity. Of this kind are Rom. v. 10, When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Ephes. ui. 4, 5, For his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ. And Coloss. i. 21, 22, And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, &c. From these passages it appears that reconciliation does not follow the act of faith, but that God is reconciled to his own, even when they are unbelievers and enemies to God. For it is not a proof of God being placable and reconcileable, but of his being pacified and actually reconciled, when such benefits are conferred upon men.
[BODY] <!--v2p480-481-->Reply. If by reconciliation nothing else is meant than the inclination and propensity of the Divine will to grant remission, and make peace with all who shall embrace the Redeemer by faith, we grant that God is reconciled to the whole human race, by virtue of the death of Christ, even while we continue enemies to him. But herein (as was stated before) a step is taken towards our actual and personal reconciliation, rather than the actual reconciliation of individuals is effected. Moreover, if by reconciliation we understand the eternal election of God, according to which he hath determined to call, justify, reconcile to himself, and save certain individuals in time, you cannot by this means make it out that God can in this sense be said to be benevolent to all the elect, even when they are living in impiety and unbelief. But this benevolence which pre- cedes faith inspired into the hearts of the elect, contains only a purpose of making peace with them, and does not place them in a state of peace obtained and of actual reconciliation. These things being premised, I reply, that all these passages speak either of the step towards personal reconciliation, or of the elect believing and being placed in a state of actual reconciliation; which cannot take place without the intervention of faith. They therefore confirm our opinion, rather than the opposite. For that which is said Rom. v. 10, When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, &c. has no other sense than that men, from a state of enmity, are transferred into a state of actual reconciliation with God, through the death of Christ, as soon as they believe in Christ. This is plain, because the Apostle, verse 1 of this chapter, restrains this peace or reconciliation to those only who are justified by faith ; and verse 11 he speaks of the same actual reconciliation as being just made, By whom we have now received the atonement, (margin) or reconciliation, that is, now, after we have believed in Christ. With respect to the second passage, Ephes. ii. 4, 5, it is most true, that God, when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, but as he hath not actually quickened any unless by faith previously inspired, so neither hath he reconciled them; for to be reconciled to God is to be delivered from the guilt of death, to be placed in a state of spiritual life, and to be presented with an hereditary right to eternal life; which things do not belong to the elect merely because they are elected, but when they have been effectually called and converted to God. The Apostle himself has taught this in verse 8, By grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of yourselves ; it is the gift of God. The last passage taken from Coloss. i. 21, 22, plainly confirms our opinion, namely, that mankind are not at once justified and reconciled to God, either by God’s eternal act of predestination, or by the merit of the death of Christ for his own elect. For what else do these words mean at first sight, You, that were formerly alienated, &c. yet now hath he reconciled, than that we then at length obtain, through the blood of Christ, remission of sins and actual reconciliation with God, when, being united to Christ by faith, we are admitted into an actual participation and possession of his merits and righteousness. It is unnecessary to add more for the explanation of this proposition. From what has been said, it may sufficiently appear, that those persons extend the universal efficacy of the death of Christ beyond its just limits, who think that by the mere act of the death of Christ all mankind promiscuously are restored to a state of grace; nor do they do less, who contend that all the predestinated, on account of the merit of Christ, are justified from eternity, and actually reconciled to God, even before they have believed the Gospel.
[H1] 6|CHAPTER VI
[H2] THE LAST PROPOSITION STATED AND CONFIRMED
[BODY] <!--v2p482-->WE have exhibited the universal virtue and efficacy of the death of Christ, explained in three propositions. In the first it was demonstrated, That this death of Christ was appointed by God and proposed to the human race, as an universal remedy applicable to all men individually. In the second, we have shewn in what sense Christ is said to have died for all, or in what sense the death of Christ may be acknowledged to have been established as an universal cause of salvation, for the good of the whole human race; namely, not as some assert, by reason of its mere sufficiency, or intrinsic value, in which respect the death of Christ, or the blood of the Son of God, isa price more than sufficient to redeem each and all men and angels ; but by reason of the Evangelical covenant established and confirmed by this death and blood of Christ, according to the tenor of which covenant a right accrued to all men individually, on condition of faith, of claiming for themselves remission of sins and eternal life. To these two propositions we have subjoined a third, in which it was shewn, That the universal virtue of the death of Christ having been stated, and the universal covenant of the Gospel having regard to every man, yet that every individual person has indeed, by the.sole benefit of this death, God under obligation to enter into peace with him, and give him life, if he should believe; but has not actual justification or reconciliation, or an actual state of grace and salvation, .before he believes.
[BODY] <!--v2p482-484-->There now remains a fourth and last proposition, which may serve chiefly for removing any scruple from the minds of those who extend this universal efficacy of the death of Christ which we defend, further than the truth of the thing permits. For there are some who, because the death of Christ, in the sense aforesaid, is affirmed to have been imposed for the human race, for themselves and all mankind individually, immediately infer, that it is now incumbent on the Divine justice and goodness, that he should administer the means necessary for producing faith to all for whom he thus gave Christ to death. But because it appears more clearly than mid-day light, that to heathens and pagans, upon whom the light of the Gospel never shone, means were not given which immediately suffice to produce faith in them, they resort to an assertion, that suf- ^ ficient means were always given even to such persons, by which they might be led mediately, and, as it were, by degrees, to faith in Christ, if they had made proper use of them. But if any one should inquire what those means of grace are, which are obvious to all men, and are sufficiently able to lead all men to the faith of Christ, they bring before us Nature clothed with the name of Grace. For they say that there are certain remains of spiritual life in all men, namely, in the understanding, some knowledge of God, in the affections, some desire after the knowledge of what is good; of which natural endowments if a man makes a right use, God will give him more grace, and present him with saving faith. Aquinas seems to lean to this opinion (Quest. 14, De veritate, art. 11, Resp. ad. 1,) where he writes in this manner, /f a man brought up in the woods should follow the dictate of natural reason in the desire of good and the avoidiug of evil, it is most certainly to be believed that God will either reveal to him by internal inspiration those things which are necessary to be believed, or will direct to him some preacher of the faith. The opinion, therefore, of those persons amounts to this, that they think that God, by the efficacy and merit of the death of Christ, is now bound, as it were by a statute law, to supply sufficient means to all, by which they may be led to Christ, if they should be willing ; so that on the part of God nothing js wanting that they should not obtain faith and a beneficial participation of the death of Christ. For the solution of this difficulty we have brought forward this proposition to be explained and confirmed, viz.
[BODY] <!--v2p484-485-->THESIS 4. The death of Christ being granted to be applicable to all men on condition of faith, tt ts consistent with the goodness and justice of God to supply or to deny, either to nations or to individuals, the means of application, and that according to the good pleasure of his own will, not according to the disparity of human wills. 1 shall premise a few things, and then proceed to confirm the proposition. — First, then, it is to be observed, that those who are of a contrary opinion think (Adver. Tilen, Corv. p. 403, and 109, 121, 158, 119), That God is bound as it were by a fixed decree, and appot..ted law, to grant the talent of grace to those who rightly use the talent of nature. Secondly, they presume, That’ every pagan, although dwelling in the shadow of death, is able, by his own free will, to use this natural talent well or, ill. Thirdly, From this distinction, whether right or wrong, of those who use their natural gifts, they endeavour to give a reason why God should deign to enlighten some with the Gospel and the knowledge of Christ, and not others. They affirm, If any one rightly uses those gifts, he will be led by degrees to a saving knowledge of Christ ; but if he wickedly abuses them, he is deservedly deprived of the knowledge of Christ. Augustine seems to have been of a different opinion (Libro de Nat. & Grat. cap. 8 and 9) where he grants, that the means of salvation cannot be applied to some infants, where also he acknowledges, that adults who have died in that region where they could not hear of the name of Christ, could by no means become righteous by nature aud free-will. We also affirm that there is no decree, no law, or promise of God extant, according to which any one can certainly conclude, This man has used the light of nature rightly or less badly, therefore God will illuminate him with supernatural grace. Arminius indeed says (Vide Armin. contra Perk. p. 218,) that God has promised this in that saying of Christ, To HIM THAT HATH SHALL BE GIVEN. But much more truly and learnedly the Reverend Bishop of Salisbury (De vera Grat. Chr. p. 68) says, Arminius here commits a fallacy, in promising to him that hath in a state of nature, a gift for salvation in a state of grace, and makes the light of faith the reward of diligence in unbelievers. For in whatever thing, and of whatever kind, good use is made, in the same thing he also promises increase, Alvarez, a Papist, informs us on this subject (De Auxil. disp. 56, p. 651), No law was ever made for giving the helps of grace to those who do all that is in their power from the faculty of nature, neither did Christ the Lord by his death merit, or desire to merit, such a law. The Apostle Paul teaches that the dispensation of supernatural grace proceeds, not according to the use and works of the will of man, but according to the purpose and counsel of the will of God : He worketh all things according to the purpose and counsel of his own will (Eph. i. 11.)
[BODY] <!--v2p485-487-->Secondly, although we acknowledge that some sparks of natural light remain in heathens, and some imperfect desire of moral good, yet, as the same Bishop of Salisbury whom we have before commended, excellently says, (pp. 66, 67) Because those deformed ruins have no inhabitant but the devil, there cannot be any other than a corrupt use, in the midst of the corruption of these remains. Let the adversaries shew to us even one man from the beginning of the world, who from the good use of nature derived to himself the gift of grace. ltisimpossible (morally speaking) that a heathen in a state of corrupt nature, should not place very many obstacles to Divine grace, so far is he from well using his natural powers, so that he may obtain for himself gratuitous and supernatural aid. Aquinas truly says, (Contr. Gent. lib. 3, p. 160) If through preceding disorder free-will should decline to evil, it will not be at all in his power to offer no impediment to grace. Therefore, they who think that Evangelical grace is given to all those who make a right use of the light of nature, and do not oppose an impediment to grace, dream that there are such men in a state of corrupt nature, as it is not credible there ever were, or are, or will be. For whatever may be called an impediment, no one can remove this impediment but God, as Bradwardine truly teaches (De causa Dei, contra. Pelag. lib. 2, cap. 32*). Thirdly, and lastly, we assert, on the testimony of the holy Scripture and of experience, that the Gospel and other means of salvation, were not granted or denied to men for this reason, because some made a right use of the light of nature, or at least made a less evil use of it, and others perversely and wickedly abused it. For it appears from the sacred Scriptures, that the light of the Gospel shone on those thoughtless persons who in the worst manner abused their natural light or talent. Such were the Romans, Corinthians, (1 Cor. vi. 11) Ephesians, (Eph. ii. 8, 21) among whom the torch of the Gospel was lighted up by the Apostles, when they were voluntarily living in the filth of superstition and lusts. It is also not less manifest, to how many the Gospel was never revealed, who lived less wickedly. Who is ignorant that among the philosophers, Socrates, Plato, Xenophon; and among the Romans, Fabricius, Scipio, Cato, made a good use of the light of nature beyond other men? yet none of these on that account became a partaker of the grace of the Gospel. Therefore the reason of the Gospel and supernatural light being given or denied, is not to be sought in the better or worse use of the light of nature, but in the good pleasure of God, who calls or not as it pleases him. These things being disposed of, let us proceed to the proposition itself: which we confirm, in the first place, by an argument derived from the death of Christ, from whence our adversaries think that they can infer the contrary.
[BODY] <!--v2p487-489-->Argument l. If by the death of Christ a covenant was established, according to which remission of sins is promised to every one that believeth, but no covenant was established according to which the Gospel is promised to any heathen who uses his natural endowments rightly, or no ways badly, then, the death of Christ being admitted, it is rash to conclude that God is bound by his faithfulness, or goodness, or justice, or any other covenant, to reveal to men the mystery of the grace of the Gospel on account of a better use of nature. But it is most certain, that such a covenant no where exists. Therefore a revelation, or a denial of the Gospel, depends on the good pleasure of God, who withholds or reveals it as it seems good to himself, and not on account of the different kinds of actions of men. We prove the major thus: that God is bound to no man, and owes no man any thing, except of his own gratuitous and voluntary promise. Who hath first. given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again ? (Rom. xi. 35.) Upon which sentence Augustine says (in Psalm Ixxxiii.), 74e Lord makes himself a debtor not by receiving, but by promising ; he hath not promised any thing spiritual to the works of corrupt nature however splendid they may be. He hath not made any law by which he may be restrained from giving spiritual blessings to men however wicked, and covered with all kind of iniquities. We ought not, therefore, to give a reason, from the difference of men or their works, why the Gospel and the knowledge of Christ is obtained by some and not by others; but to acquiesce in the good pleasure of the Divine will; according to the Apostle, (2 Tim. i. 9) He hath called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. But still it may be pretended, Although God is not bound either by debt, or by any promise confirmed by the death of Christ, to reveal Christ to them that make a good use of the light of nature, yet since of his grace he is accustomed to give to men many things which he had not promised; what should hinder us from saying that he has this as his common way of distributing the grace of the Gospel, that he grants it to those who make a better use of the light of nature, and does, not grant it to those who, by abusing the light of nature more than others, render themselves more unworthy of the light of grace? One impediment is, that by this we do not admit the perpetual testimony of Scripture to the contrary, which refers the communication of saving grace, not to the man who works better, but to God, who loves and pities one more than another. (Rom. ix. 18.) Another impediment is, experience itself. For it often happens, that a man from his infancy is very modest, temperate, and a victor over his passions for the most part, and lives and dies in a place where the Gospel of Christ cannot by any means be preached to him : But another, enslaved to lust, and covered with wickedness, is so overruled by God, that he hears, believes, and is saved, We say then that all men, from their bad use of nature, render themselves unworthy of the Gospel; and that God, in communicating or denying the Gospel, is not accustomed to weigh the degrees of human worthiness and unworthiness, and from thence to derive his common rule of bestowing or not bestowing grace; but sometimes denies it to those who have not made good use of the remains of nature, and in the mean time grants it to those who have abused them much worse: and sometimes does the contrary, From whence it appears That the reason of the difference why God grants his grace to one and not to another, ought to be referred to the good pleasure of God himself, and not to the different kind of operations of men.
[BODY] <!--v2p489-490-->ARGUMENT 2, Secondly, we prove, that it is not contrary to the Divine goodness, even admitting the death of Christ, still not to grant the means of application to all men whatsoever according to his good pleasure: because the death of Christ is a benefit granted freely by God himself tothe human race. But it is just and right that the free application of his own benefit should be in the power of the Benefactor, who is never bound by the giving of one benefit to the giving of another, unless he should have made such a promise; which promise of granting the means by which the death of Christ may be applied, neither can all men promiscuously, nor any person for himself individually, rightly assert was made. Moreover, it is no reflection on the Divine goodness not to grant any benefit to one, if he does not bring an injury upon any one, or unjustly deny to or deprive any one of a benefit due to him; but illumination by the grace of the Gospel, the death of Christ being supposed, yet is not due to nature, now corrupted by sin. Thus Bannes says (In. 1, qu. 23, art. 3, p. 279,) The same argument is not cpplicable to natural and supernatural illumination, because that which is natural i$ due to nature, but the illumination of grace is not due to nature, especially as it is so corrupted by sin, but is conferred by grace. If it is conferred by grace, then it is not due to all. For among the twelve articles which pertain to the Christian faith, Augustine has put this second (Epist. 107), The grace of God is not given to all men. If it is conferred of grace, then it is not given or denied according to the good or bad use of natural light ; for, as Prosper rightly remarks, (Resp. 8, ad Capit. Gallor.) It is impiety to affirm that the grace by which we are saved is either given in payment for meritorious deeds or restrained by evil ones. And, (De Vocat. Gent.) There are no wickednesses so detestable as to drive away the gift of grace. Those therefore who are desirous of defending the justice and goodness of God by human conjectures, contend that he supplies the gratuitous means of salvation to all who make use of their natural endowments either aright or not badly, but denies them to others who have abused the same gifts, (as Augustine says) being ignorant of the height and depth of Divine grace, form improbable fables. Whether, therefore, we will or not, if the cause is sought Why those means, by which they may apply Christ to themselves for salvation, are granted to some individuals, and not to others, we must overlook the disparity of men, or of human works, and ascend to the free good pleasure of God, as Prosper elegantly observes, (Carmine. de Ingratis. cap. 35) Since the same cause equally implicates all, they are not to be distinguished by merit, who are far from possessing the gift.
[BODY] <!--v2p490-492-->ARGUMENT 3. From the fact we argue thus as to the’ right; God does not omit to do any thing, which it would be an impeachment upon Divine goodness, justice, or wis- . dom not to do. This cannot be doubted, since it is impossible that he who is Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom itself, could ever depart from the rule of goodness, justice, or wisdom in doing or not doing any thing. I add, therefore, the minor, and affirm that, the death of Christ being admitted, yet God has heretofore denied, and does now deny to many nations and many individuals, those means without which the death of Christ is applied to no one. This will evidently appear, whether we consider the immediate means of salvation by which man is placed in a state of spiritual life and salvation, and in the actual participation of the death and merits of Christ, such as repentance, faith, regeneration, and sanctification; or whether we regard the external means, which, as instruments, God makes use of to produce the former, such as the sending of teachers and pastors, the preaching of the Gospel, and all other helps, without which those internal and immediate means of salvation cannot ordinarily be produced. With respect to the former, faith and a saving knowledge of Christ, is a special gift, granted to some, denied to others, according to the good pleasure of the Divine will. Z4 is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given (Matt. xiii. 11.) No man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father (John vi. 65.) By grace are ye saved, through faith ; and that not of yourselves; at ds the gift of God (Ephes. ii. 8.) All men have not faith (2 Thess. iii. 2.) So likewise as to repentance, regeneration, sanctification, all which are given to some because the special mercy of God procures them, but are denied to others, because the same mercy does not unfold its riches to them. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned (Lament. v. 21.) He hath mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardeneth (Rom. ix. 18.) Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God (John i. 13) Blessed be God, who according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again (1 Pet. 1.3.) I omit other passages. From these it appears, that God gives or denies to men those means, by which union with Christ and salvation are immediately connected, according to the good pleasure of his will, not according to the difference of the human will. This all the orthodox Fathers have stoutly defended against the Pelagians. Ambrose, on Luke vii. 9, says, God calls whom he thinks fit, and makes religious whom he will, Augustine observes, (Epist. 107) We know that grace is not given to all men, nor according to the merits of their will to whom it is given. In the same Epistle he teaches further, That those to whom this grace is not given, differ for the most part by no merit, no will from others, but are in a similar case with those to whom it is given. As in natural birth the formation by Divine power precedes all will of man to be born; so in spiritual birth, in which we begin to put off the old man, no man can have a good will of his own motion; as Fulgentius observes (lib. de Incarn. & Grat. cap. 19,) and again, (cap. 21) If God by his grace should not give to man, man could never be willing to believe in God, because grace does not find this will, but produces it in man. It is clear, therefore, that God does not give those internal means promiscuously to all men, by which they may apply to themselves the death of Christ. Nor can our opponents here pretend, that this Divine giving and not giving of faith derives its origin. from the resistance or non-resistance of the human will, since the Scriptures expressly refer this to the good pleasure of God in being willing or not willing to shew compassion ; and the Fathers in express words exclude the disparity of the wills of men before grace received.
[BODY] <!--v2p492-->Hitherto we have disputed about immediate means, let us now descend to the external means, whereby these are conferred. The death and merit of Christ had its efficacy in the acceptation of God from the origin of the world ; yet, under the Old Testament, God did not grant to all men every where the external means of its application, but, as the Psalmist says, He sheweth his word unto Jacob, &c. He hath not dealt so with any nation (Ps. cxlvii. 19, 20.) And of the same sentiment is St. Paul, (Acts xiv. 16) God in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Prosper has noticed the same thing (De lib. arbitr. p. 225.) He says, [t is not removed from common observation, what countless numbers of mankind in so many ages have died, sunk in their errors and impieties, without any knowledge of the true God. And looking to the times of the New Testament, he says, (De vocat. Gent. 11. 17) There are also now, in the exireme parts of the world, some nations upon whom the grace of the Saviour hath not shone. From which things it follows, that, even the death of Christ being admitted, God is nevertheless not bound, by reason of his goodness or justice, to provide and offer to all men individually the means whereby they may apply Christ to themselves. For with respect to God the argument well follows from fact to right both affirmatively and negatively, God does this, therefore he does justly ; God does not do this, therefore he is not bound by any right that he should do it.
[BODY] <!--v2p492-->OBJECTION 1. Some persons meet this argument by— The reason why the Gospel is not preached every where arises not so much from this, that those who should preach it are not sent by God, as because those who are sent refuse to go. This is the opinion of Corvinus (contra Tilenum, p. 105.)
[BODY] <!--v2p492-493-->Reply. But if God, by reason of his goodness and justice, as it were from some kind of congruity, the death of Christ being supposed, were bound to communicate to all sufficient means of application, he would not suffer any one through carelessness to defraud another of a benefit due to him, especially of such an one as that, without which no salvation is to be hoped for. Moreover, it implies a contradiction, that God, by his ordinary law should provide and administer to all men the means relative to the application of Christ, and not administer them to some, because of the carelessness of the preachers. As if the care of the preachers were not to be numbered among these means without which the knowledge and application of Christ preached cannot be obtained, Further, If the goodness and justice of God should require this, that these means of applying Christ should be administered to all, without doubt he would kindle, at least in some of the preachers, a mind and care of preaching and offering the Gospel to some individuals in a nation. For it is he who knows how to send forth labourers into his harvest, according to his good pleasure. And lastly, what carelessness of preachers was the cause that the Gospel was not preached by any one to the Americans two hundred years ago, when nobody ever dreamt that there were such nations in existence? We must, therefore, refer it to a higher cause, namely, the free good pleasure of God in granting or denying these means. He by his special providence directs them to be administered by his servants, as may be seen Acts xvi. 6, 7, They were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia; after they were come to Mysia, they essayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not.
[BODY] <!--v2p493-->OBJECTION 2. Secondly, they answer, That those who have been long destitute of the grace of the Gospel, have refused it by their ancestors, and thus their posterity are deservedly deprived of the preaching of the Gospel, because their ancestors despised it. We are not therefore to refer it to the absolute will of God, that the saving light of the Gospel does not shine upon some nations. (Corvin. p. 108, and Voss. p. 671).
[BODY] <!--v2p493-494-->Reply. But neither do these things well consist with their opinions. For if God, respect being had to the death of Christ, had determined to administer to all men sufficiently the means of salvation, it would seem not to be equitable, that on account of the preaching of the word, which was despised by their ancestors in the time of Noah, he should deny it to their posterity after some thousands of years. For if notwithstanding the sin of Adam, it was obtained by the death of Christ (according to their opinion) that sufficient means of salvation should be administered to all, it would be unreasonable and unjust to break this, as it were, ordinary law, on pretence of sins committed by some others who were our ancestors. As, therefore, on account of the sin of Adam, God may justly deny to his posterity every spiritual benefit, so we admit that from the sins of the ancestors of others, God may also take occasion to deny to us any gratuitous benefit. Butif. by the death of Christ and the concurring goodness of God, a law is established concerning the administration of the means of grace, now, as if on account of the sid of Adam, who was the federal head of all his posterity, God will not abrogate this his decree ; so much less consistent is it, that on account of the sins of others, who do not sustain this common relationship to the human race, their posterity should be deprived of this benefit. In vain, therefore, do they resort to the sins of their ancestors, in order to give a reason for the denial of this thing, who profess, that by virtue of the death of Christ and the goodness of God, it was prepared for all men individually by the Divine decree, and as it were due to them by an established law.
[BODY] <!--v2p494-->OBJECTION 3. Thirdly, they answer, That the grace of the Gospel is denied to some, because by continued transgression against the law they have shewn themselves to be unworthy of having Divine grace offered to them.
[BODY] <!--v2p494-496-->Rerpry. But this answer will make the truth of our opinion more evident. For, in the first place, I assume, what no man in his senses will deny, that every man in the state of corrupt nature, if his sins were marked, has shewn himself to be unworthy of the grace of the Gospel. And I also add, That the worthiness and unworthiness of men, or their greater and less unworthiness, is not the rule according to which God proceeds in dispensing or denying the Gospel either to individuals or to nations. Which things being granted, it will follow, that unworthiness is always found in those to whom the Gospel is denied; but it is in those also to whom it is granted. Therefore this unworthiness will have the nature of a circumstance which always accompanies the persons to whom the Gospel is given or not given; but it will not be a cause of discrimination why the Gospel is given to one and not given to another. Therefore in this matter we must come to the good pleasure of the Divine will alone, who, as it pleases him, grants his aid both to those who do and to those who do not what they can, as Alvarez says (De Auxil. disp. 58.) But since this answer, which teaches that the grace of the Gospel is repelled by the unworthiness of men, seems tacitly to hint that it may be procured ly some degree of worthiness in them, let us hear what the orthodox Fathers have taught against the Pelagians in this matter. Augustine (Epist. 107, p. 500) shews that the saving grace of Christ is not granted nor denied to men according to this rule of greater or less unworthiness. His words have been before quoted. Prosper very often inculcates this (De vocat. Gent. lib. 1, cap. 15), Part of men are delivered, while another part perish; but if we would asciibe this to the merits of their wills, that it might appear that the wicked had neglected grace and the good had chosen it, the case of people innumerable will oppose us, who throughout so many ages have not been enlightened by the preaching of the heavenly doctrine. Nor can we say, that their posterity were any better, upon whom the light has arisen, &c. Again (in Carmine de Ingratis, cap. 12,) Prosper shews that this was the very sentiment of the Pelagians, namely, that God of his own goodness was willing to call all men to grace, but that the will of some, their first light having been extinguished by their vices, had made itself unworthy of a second. But he contends, that on the contrary, examples may be produced (cap. 14) which shew that the hearts of the wicked, in whom nothing good had ever dwelt, and who had no sign or sense of righteousness, were converted by the power of God. The sum of the argument comes to this, That the grace of the Gospel is not given to men because they are judged worthy of it, since no man is found worthy of so great a gift; nor is it denied to men because they are more unworthy than others, since this light has been granted to the worst, while at the same time it has been denied to those who were less depraved. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the secret good pleasure of God, who, that his mercy may shine more conspicu- _ ously, does not regularly grant the light of the Gospel to those who have made a good or a less bad use of the light of nature, but on the contrary, calls to himself the slothful and the negligent, and unworthy and ungrateful sinners. And hence it appears, that God always remains free and that it is in no way inconsistent with his goodness to, give or not to give to any men the Gospel, and other means necessary for the application of the merits of Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will, no account being taken of man’s worthiness or unworthiness, or his greater or less unworthiness.
[BODY] <!--v2p496-500-->ARGUMENT 4. The same may be proved by the manifest inconsistencies by which the contrary opinion is maintained. For if by the death of Christ it has been universally obtained that God should be bound by a fixed decree or by some law of congruity as much as possible, to grant to all men individually the grace of the preaching of the Gospel, and of internal sanctification, then it would follow, that the primary reason why one is actually made partaker of both these gifts, and another is not, consists in this, that the one by opposing an obstacle repels this grace, or altogether prevents it from being offered to him, the other neither repels it nor hinders it. Our adversaries do not avoid this consequence. For they do not restrain the difference of the call of the Gospel and saving grace being denied or granted, to the mere will of God, but to various conditions or dispositions considered on the part of men. Thus Corvinus* says, (contra Tilen. p. 489) Although the word of the cross is not preached every where, yet God is ready to announce it to all those who duly submit themselves to the ministry of the law, that is, who follow the light of the law of nature, which flourishes even in the hearts of heathens. And discoursing of natural gifts (p. 118) he says, That God has left these gifts to the Gentiles, that uf, according to the intention of God, they should use those gifts to glorify God, according to the measure of their knowledge, they should be led to Christ and the knowledge of himself ; but on the contrary, should be left in their ignorance, if they should hold the truth which they had in unrighteousness. Here he openly suspends the call of the Gospel on the use or abuse of natural gifts. The same Corvinus contends that internal quickening grace is so set before all men by an ordinary law, that the difference, why one man is actually made a partaker of this grace and another is not, is restrained to the difference of human wills, and not to the good pleasure of God. Yea, he says, That it is certain that the conversion of no individual in particular is intended by God (contra Boger. p. 263.) But although these things may be pleasing to human reason, they are contrary to the word of God, and may be overturned by manifest inconveniences. For if we admit, either that the external call of the Gospel, or that internal and effectual infusion of regenerating grace are given and deuied according to the various dispositions and operations of men ; it will follow, in the first place, That free-will in a corrupt state, not illuminated with the light of the Gospel, can make such good use of its own natural endowments, as that from thence God, according to his ordinary law, dictated to himself of his own goodness, may be bound to give spiritual grace to a natural man. But this is contrary to the Apostle, who says, (Rom. xi. 6) grace 1s no more grace, if it be of works. For, as Fulgentius says, (De Incarn. & Grat. Christi, cap. 18) We should not then receive it from the compassion of the Giver, but from the equity of retribution. Secondly, It would follow also, that the reason of predestination and preterition is to be assigned to the different qualities or actions of men, which all the orthodox oppose; since the reason of predestination, which is a preparation of grace, cannot be different from the reason of grace, which is the bringing of it into act. He, therefore, who teaches that the reason of grace being given or not given, is to be sought from hu- man dispositions or operations, necessarily seeks for the same reason of predestination and preterition. Thirdly, It would follow, that God would oppose a law made by himself, when he, as it were, forces grace upon those who place an obstacle to his grace, which the Apostle Paul most humbly confesses that he had done; and yet God mercifully called him to the knowledge and grace of Christ, when he was committing a flagrant sin and rushing against Christ. On which Fulgentius excellently observes (De Incarn. & Grat. cap. 18,) In what the mercy of God prevents us, or preventing what things it finds in us, the Teacher of the Gentiles shews us, not in any other, but in himself, saying, WHo was BEFORE a blasphemer, &c. Here he intimates, indeed, that all men are refractory until preventing grace subdues them. Fourthly, If it be admitted, that this giving or denying of grace, is according as human wills place an obstacle in the way or not, almost all the definitions in the Councils against the Pelagians will be set aside, such as, first, the decree against Pelagius in the Diospolitan Council,* It 2s confessed, that grace is not given of merit, in order that it may be true grace, that is, given freely through his mercy, who hath said, Y witt HAVE MERCY ON WHOM I WILL HAVE MERCY. For that grace should be given or not given, according to the use made of natural endowments, as it may be rightly or not, or (as others say) according as a man does or does not what he can, is the same with the Fathers, as to be given of merit, and denied of demerit. Further, neither will the decree of the African fathers in their Synodical epistle* stand good. Grace itself is in no way acknowledged, unless it be given, and as long as it 1s not in man, so long he necessarily opposes it in word or in work. How can it be understood, that the grace of the Gospel is to be given to heathens who are in the state of corrupt nature, as it were, on this condition, if they oppose no obstacle to grace, since so long as they are destitute of grace, they necessarily resist it, by the necessity indeed of a depraved disposition and habit. Lastly, they oppose the decrees of the Council of Orange (Canon 4) If any one contends that God waits for our will, in order to cleanse us from sin ; and does not confess, that even if we are willing to be cleansed, this desire is wrought in us by the operation and influence of the Holy Spirit, he opposes the Apostle. And Canon 6, Jf any one subjoius the help of grace to the humility and obedience of man, &c. he opposes the Apostle. I omit others. Let them explain to us, how God cannot be said to wait for the will of man, and to subjoin the help of supernatural grace to the obedience of the law of nature written in the hearts of men, if, the death of Christ being granted, according to his common mode of acting, God gives grace to all, if they make a right use of their natural endowments, and does not give it, if they do not make a right use of them. Since, therefore, all these things are far from the truth, it remains that we should say that God, notwithstanding the merit of the death of Christ, may and does give or deny the grace of applying this merit to individuals, according to the good pleasure and freedom of his own will, and not according to the merits or various operations of the wills of mankind.
[BODY] <!--v2p500-->ARGUMENT 5. Our opinion is confirmed by the useful ends which it serves to illustrate, and which are altogether abrogated by the contrary opinion. For example, 1f God, the death of Christ being admitted, be assumed nevertheless to distribute the grace by which it may be applied, or not to distribute to men, according to his own good pleasure, and not according to any disparity of human wills or actions, from thence will appear,—First, the absolute ie berty of God in the first conferring of grace; which Divine attribute in this thing is to be acknowledged by. all. I will give unto this man, even as unto thee, (Matt. xx. 14) is the voice of God asserting for himself his own liberty, even when the merits of men are unequal. Butalso, I will give to this man and not to thee 1s à word equally worthy of God, where all things on the part of men are acknowledged to be equal, and it equally goes to illustrate the supreme liberty of God, as St. Paul proves, Rom.ix. For although God were willing to be bound by the virtue and efficacy of the death of Christ, to give remission of sins to those who believe, and to give glory to those who are regenerate and ingrafted into Christ, yet he hath not willed that he should be obliged to give the Gospel to such and such nations or individuals, or to give faith and efficacious grace in consequence of considering any of their actions or dispositions in the state of corrupt nature, without Christ. They, therefore, go to diminish the Divine liberty which God hath reserved to himself, who teach that grace is communicated or denied to men according to their good or bad use of nature; which is the same as if they should say, That grace is prevented by nature.
[BODY] <!--v2p500-501-->Secondly, According to our opinion, that which the Scriptures urge so much, becomes conspicuous, viz. the gratuitous and special mercy of God in giving to some men both the light of the Gospel and saving grace. On which Prosper appositely remarks (De vocat. Gent. lib. 2, cap. 31,) There is some part of the human race, which is led by special benefits to eternal salvation. They altogether take away this special mercy, who think that by the death of Christ it was effected that God should offer the means of saving grace to all, but should leave to the special freewill of individuals whether they would obey or resist offered grace; so that if they oppose no obstacle, grace should be given them, but if they do, they should be deprived of grace. For according to the opinion of these persons, God did not shew any special mercy to Jacob or Peter, which he did not shew to Esau or Judas; but Jacob and Peter applied to themselves, by some special operation, what Esau and Judas neglected to apply. This Faustus of Rheis taught openly, (De lib. arbitr. lib. 1, cap. 10) who denied the special dispensation of God concerning the salvation of certain men; which he learnt from Pelagius, as may be seen from Prosper, (Carm. de Ingratis. cap. 10.) But Augustine thought otherwise (De bono persever. cap. 12,) The Lord gives to whom he will because he is merciful; and does not give to whom he will not, that he may make known the riches of his glory in the vessels of mercy.
[BODY] <!--v2p501-502-->Thirdly, According to our opinion it follows, that all occasion of glorying is taken away from men, and the glory of human salvation is wholly attributed to God, who distinguishes one man from another, according to the saying of the Apostle, (1 Cor.iv.7) Who maketh thee to differ? What hast thou that thou didst not receive? Fromwhom, says Augustine, but from him who maketh thee to differ from another, to whom he hath not given what he hath given to thee? (De pred. Sanct. cap. 9.) But if the opinion of those should be adopted, who think that by the death of Christ God is made equally benevolent towards all men, and contend that from this equal inclination towards all men, he so administers his grace, that whosoever makes a good use of the light of nature, or does what he can of himself, attracts this grace to himself, and he who makes a bad use of the same light, or does not do what he can of himself, does not obtain it; he who thus becomes a partaker of grace, has just ground of glorying in himself, because, by his own free-will, he made himself to differ from another, from whom he was not made to differ by any special gift of Divine mercy.
[BODY] <!--v2p502-503-->ARGUMENT 6. If, the death of Christ being supposed, according to the decree of God, the gift or denial of grace to individuals proceeds not from the absolute freedom of God, but from the difference of human wills and actions, then it is easy for any one to give an account why the Gospel was denied to one nation, why it was granted to another, and why faith, and quickening and regenerating grace is given to some individuals and not to others. For on the part of those that have it, itis answered, That the — light of the Gospel was given to them, because they made a good or not a bad use of the light of nature. On the part of those that have it not, it is answered, that they remain destitute of the light of the Gospel, because they have not made a good use of the light of nature. And so among Christians, if it should be inquired, why one man has faith and regenerating grace, and another has it not? on the part of those who have it, it is answered, Because they were willing to believe, and were unwilling to put any obstacle in the way ; and on the part of those who have it not, Because they would not believe, and would not remove the obstacle to grace. At the same time, there is not one word about the special call, according to his own purpose, wherewith God powerfully inclines the hearts of those to believe whom specially he is willing to pity. I now add, that it is the Pelagians who give so obvious a reason why grace is obtained or not on the part of men, and that it is condemned by all the orthodox ; who always limit the gift or denial of efficacious grace to the secret purpose of the good pleasure of God ; nor do they think that, the death of Christ being admitted, God is so bound to administer his own grace promiscuously, that to have it or not to have it, depends on the difference of human wills. We do not deny the demerit, unworthiness, and voluntary wickedness of those who remain without grace; but we assert, that all labour under this disease until they are healed by the remedy of special grace. Nor do any of the unregenerate by a better will than others, attract grace to themselves, but they receive a better will through efficacious grace given to them of the mere good pleasure of God, according to the saying of the Apostle (Rom. ix. 16,) It is not of him that willeih, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy ; and Phil. i. 13, It is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. To this Prosper refers the difference between believers and unbelievers, (Ad excerpta Genuens. resp. ad Dub. 4) Many hear the word of truth, but some believe it, others speak against al, these therefore are willing to believe it, the others are unwilling. Who does not know this? Who will deny this? But since for some the will is not prepared by the Lord, tt is to be discussed what may come of mercy, and what of judgment. And a little after, AMercy and judgment are made in the wills themselves. To this secret good pleasure of God, and not to the difference of human wills applying or not applying themselves to offered grace, according to their own innate liberty, Augustine also every where refers the actual participation of grace, (De bono persever. cap. 8) Of two wicked men of adult age, why one is so called that he follows him that calls him, the other is either not called, or is not so calíed that he follows him that calls him, are the inscrutable judgments of God. And (De pred. Sanct. cap. 8) hesays, Why does not God teach all men? If we should say, because those whom he does not teach are unwilling to learn, an answer will be given to us, where it is said, Lurp, THOU WILT TURN AND QUICKEN Us.
[BODY] <!--v2p503-504-->Lastly, Aquinas himself does not think that any other reason is to be given why the gifts of saving grace are given to some individuals and not to others, beside the simple will of God. (Contr. Gent. lib. 3, cap. 161.) He says, Although he who sins puts an impediment in the way of grace, and as far as the order of things requires ought not to receive grace, yet sometimes of the abundance of his goodness, God prevents with his help those who offer an impediment to grace, turning them from evil, and converting them to good, &c. Afterwards he adds, He does not prevent with his help all who impede grace, but some, in whom he chooses to shew his mercy, as in others the order of justice is manifested. At length, lest we should refer it to the difference of human wills, that some obtain efficacious grace and are converted, and others do not obtain it and remain unconverted, he subjoins these words most worthy of observation, Since God, from among the men who are held under the same sins, by his preventing grace converts some, but endures others, or permits them to go on according to the order of things, the reason is not to be sought why he converts some and not others; for this depends on his simple will, in the same manner as it proceeded from his simple will, that when he made all things of nothing, some things were made more honourable than others. ' Such is the opinion of Thomas Aquinas. Therefore there is not any Divine decree established by the death of Christ concerning grace being administered promiscuously to all men, as it were, with this condition annexed, that individuals should become partakers or not of this grace, as they should put obstacles in the way or not; but the difference between those that place an obstacle in the way, and those who do not, is to be resolved into the mere good pleasure of God, as the primary and radical cause.
[BODY] <!--v2p504-505-->ARGUMENT 7. If the will of God, through the death of Christ, be understood as determined to administer grace to all men individually, by which they may apply Christ to themselves and be saved ; yet so, that those only receive and possess grace who have either made a good use of the light of nature, or have not opposed an obstacle to the grace which is offered to them, and all others do not receive grace, then the ultimate reason of obtaining or not obtaining grace and salvation, would not be attributed to the good pleasure of God, but to human free-will. The consequence is clear and strong; because by those who are of this opinion, God is presumed, on account of the death of Christ, to administer and offer to all men grace sufficient to apply Christ to themselves and to obtain salvation ; he is also presumed not to give saving grace to any one of his absolute or mere good pleasure. Thus the Remonstrants, in the declaration of their opinion about the third article of the Acts of the Synod of Dort, (p. 15) say, That the saving efficacy of grace depends not on the congruity of the calling of God (as some Papists assert), nor on the omnipotent power of God, as Prosper (Carm. de Ingr. cap. 14 and 15) and Augustine affirm, (Contr Julian. lib. 5, cap. 3; De pred. Sanct. cap. 2; De grat. & libr. arbit. cap. 20, and De corrept. & grat. cap. 14) but on such an operation as produees its effect most certainly, when man does not oppose that rebellion, which he can oppose from himself. As if they should say, that grace is effectual in certain individuals, because they do not oppose any obstacle to it, when they ought to say, that the reason why an obstacle is not opposed is, because God of his own good pleasure has given effectual grace. I now add a minor, and affirm that it is altogether averse from theology and from truth, to contend that any decree is established by the death of Christ, according to which the certain procuring of grace and salvation is referred, not to the absolute will of God, but to the determination of the human will. For the method of obtaining or not obtaining salvation, which is resolved into the freedom of the human will, was the first grace, which was given to the first Adam, as Augustine has rightly observed, (De corrept. & grat. cap. 11 and 12) but that is far more powerful which is given in Christ to all who are saved ; from which it arises that they should be willing and only witling, in order really to overcome the reluctant will of the flesh. Therefore, after Christ is given to us, this distinction, that some have that grace by which they apply Christ to themselves for salvation, and others have it not, is to be referred, not to the difference of human wills, but to the good pleasure of the will of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p505-509-->ARGUMENT 8. Our last argument is derived from the testimonies of the Fathers, who willingly confess, that to some persons, and that according to the good pleasure of the Divine will, those means and gifts are not granted, by which they may be able to believe in Christ and obtain salvation ; which God would never omit to do, if, the death of Christ being admitted, the goodness, wisdom, and justice of God required that it should be supplied to all men individually. Nor shall we quote only certain individual Fathers, but produce a few testimonies from those who were engaged with the Pelagians and Semipelagians. But I premise one thing worthy of observation, When we say that the orthodox Fathers who opposed Pelagius and the Pelagians, admit that grace is given to all men, out of regard to the death of Christ, the word grace is not to be extended beyond its proper limits (as the Pelagians formerly extended it). For whatever is graciously granted by God to men, may in some sense be called grace. Thus the light of nature with which God illuminates every man that comes into the world; that testimony of things created, by. which the heathen are directed to some knowledge of the Creator; those external benefits by which God testifies his philanthropy towards the whole world ; those internal motions with which he sometimes affects the minds of heathens, so as to restrain them from any evil work, or to excite them to any good work, may in this large sense claim the name of grace. The Pelagians concealed the poison of their pestilential doctrine under this general notion of grace. But neither do the Scriptures so understand the grace given by Christ, nor the holy Fathers, who, after the rise of Pelagius, learnt to speak more cautiously. Under the name of the grace of Christ, or saving grace, received in the sense of the Scriptures, those benefits and supernatural gifts alone are meant, which are directly ordained for obtaining salvation through Christ, but not infallibly : such as the preaching of the Gospel; the illumination of the minds of men in the mysteries of the faith, and, in one word, whatever supernaturally tends to unite men to Christ and place them in a state of salvation, yet does not of itself unite them to him, or translate them from a state of death to a state of salvation. This preaching and knowledge of the Gospel the Apostle has designated by the name of grace, (1 Cor. 1. 4, and ii. 11), and hence it is that St. Peter (1 Epist. iv. 10) calls preachers stewards of the manifold grace of God. So Augustine calls the Gospel itself, (De pecc. mer. & rem. lib. i. 22) the Christian grace; and Prosper calls it the grace of salvation, (De voc. Gent. lib. ii. cap. 17) and in this sense he affirms that some nations were living without the grace of God, (Sentent. 10, super Capit. Gallor.) namely, when they were living where no one preached to them the Gospel of Christ. There are also other supernatural gifts which place those who have them in a state of salvation. such as a good Will, Faith, Conversion, Regeneration, and, in short, those which belong only to men who are ingrafted into Christ and reconciled to God. And these Augustine thinks are to be properly called by the name of the grace of Christ. But the former, viz. the preaching and knowledge of Christian doctrine, he applies to this grace of Christ properly so called, so far as they serve to produce and promote it. In his book on the grace of Christ (Epist. 95, cap. 10, 47) he professedly treats of it, so as to shew, that by this name he means not the illumination of the mind and excitement of the will, but faith itself and the gift of a good will. This grace of Christ he paints in lively colours, and calls it the grace whereby we are justified from iniquity and are saved from infirmity ; the grace which we have not iu common with the wicked, but that whereby we become the sons of God. Let us now attend to the testimonies of the Fathers. : First, we shall produce those which affirm that the grace of the preaching of the Gospel, the death of Christ being supposed, is due or given to all men, yea, affirm that it is denied to some, and that according to the purpose of the Divine will, which would never be done, if grace were due to all by the merit of the death of Christ. Augustine (de bono persev. cap. 8) observes, Of two wicked men of adult age, why one ts socalled, that he should obey the call, and another is either not called at all, or not effectually, is to be referred to the inscrutable judgments of God. Here he plainly acknowledges that some are not called at all. And (cap. 14) he teaches, that to some who by the supreme judgment of God are not separated from the mass of perdition, these means are not granted by which they might believe. In both of these passages he asserts the denial of means, and refers to the inscrutable abyss of Divine predestination, and not to the differences of human wills or actions, as the Pelagians and Semipelagians did. See also cap. 11, where he refers it to the will of God, and secret predestination, that God does not grant assistance to some. Prosper plainly asserts that the means of saving grace, or the call to grace, are denied to some, (Resp. 4 ad Cap. Gall.) where he does not repel this objection as false, That all men are not called to grace, but acknowledges that this may be truly said of all those, to whom he hath not made known the mystery of the cross of Christ, and the redemption of his blood. And (Sentent. 4) as afore-mentioned, We cannot say that there is a call of grace where there are as yet no sacraments of the Church. 1n which passage is to be observed, that he opposes those who defend the opinion of grace procured for and offered to all — for Christ’s sake, and who imagine, I know not what calling and sufficiency of grace, in the midst of the darkness of Paganism. What Prosper has spoken of little children, we may say of adults, (Resp. ad obj. 4) Let them be proved to be called in any way, to whom the planter could not preach, nor the waterer assist. Fulgentius, (lib. 1, de verit. Predest.) To men who are capable of reason, God either grants or denies means suitable to salvation, shelving his justice towards some, his mercy to others. His meaning is, That God sends or does not send preachers of the Gospel, according to his good pleasure; he sends when he is willing to shew his mercy ; he does not send when he chooses to manifest his justice. I add also from Fulgentius, that the common guilt which all men have contracted in Adam, suffices to justify the denial of the grace of the Gospel to any man. His words are, This grace of God by which we are saved is not given for any preceding good desert, nor yet is it denied for any preceding evil desert. For the first man transmitted. the deserts of his sin to all his posterity, &c. From which it appears, that according to the opinion of Fulgentius, original sin is a sufficiently just cause why the grace of Christ should be denied to any man. Which Aquinas himself acknowledges, (23 2® qu. 2% art. 5% resp. ad 1") where he says, the help of grace is mercifully given to some, to others of justice it is not given, in punishment of preceding sin, at least of original sin. From all these things, we have what we proposed to confirm in the first place, viz. That there is no law decreed or appointed, by the merit of the death of Christ, for administering the means of the grace of the Gospel to the whole human race: but that God, notwithstanding any respect to the death of Christ, may of right deny, and actually has denied to some, even the call of grace.
[BODY] <!--v2p509-512-->Secondly, from the same Fathers we shall shew, that that grace, which we call by way of eminence the grace of Christ, that is, which makes a man to be a living member of Christ, and a partaker of salvation and eternal life, is not prepared and offered, much less given to all by the merit of the death of Christ, but is prepared and offered and given to some, and is not prepared for or given to others, and that according to the absolute good pleasure of God. Augustine (Contr. duas epist. Pelag. lib. 2, cap. 2) says, According to the purpose of God one is called, another is not called. To him who is called he gives gratuitously that which is good ; of which good, calling is the chief: to him who is not called, he renders evil, because all are guilty, since by one man sin entered into the world. From which words it appears that calling according to purpose, which communicates faith and love, and places man in a state of salvation, is given to some, and is denied to others. Moreover it is also evident, that this grace is given to them to whom it is given, not on account of any special obedience of the will of the person who receives it, but of the special mercy of God, who calls and inclines the will to obedience. It appears further, that the common guilt which all have contracted in Adam, is enough to defend the justice of God in respect of those whom he passes by as to the gift of saving grace, which even Bellarmin does not dare to deny, as may be seen (lib. 20, de Grat. & lib. arb. cap. 4.) A second testimony of Augustine is contained (lib. 4, Contra duas epist. Pelag. 6,) He who makes men his sheep, makes free the wills of men to the obedience of piety. But why he makes some men his sheep, and does not make others, is a question which pertains to that depth, which the Apostle desiring to look into, stopped and exclaimed, Ou, vag DEPTH of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. — (Rom. xi. 33,) In these words, by making some and not others his sheep, he means nothing more than making some faithful and obedient, and not making others so. Both are attributed to God, and that according to the purpose of his secret will. Therefore there has not been established by the death of Christ such a decree, as some have formed, for preparing, offering, and giving to all men that grace by which they may be rendered believing and obedient, under the condition of free-will embracing it. A third testimony is taken from (De Pred. Sanctor. cap. 9,) Faith, both in its commencement and perfection, is the gift of God. And that this gift is granted to some and not to others, cannot be doubted at all by any who do not wilfully oppose the most plain words of Scriptures. But why it is not given to all, ought not to stagger the believer, who believes that from one all are under condemnation. He clearly teaches that the grace of faith is not given to all; and that there is no need of seeking any reason why this grace is not given, since that damnable state in which we were all born is sufficient to shew the justice of God, even if he should not give the grace of salvation to any mortal man. A fourth testimony is derived from the book (De corrept. & Grat. cap. 5.) where the unbelieving and rebellious are reproved in this manner, I should be rightly blamed, if I had it not (that is, faith and obedience) of my own fault, that is, if Icoudd give it to myself, or take it, and should not do so, or if God should give it and I should be unwilling to receive it. But when the very will is prepared by the Lord, why do you blame me, &c. Augustine answers in this manner, (cap. 6) The original depravity through which God 1s disobeyed, is of man, because by falling, through his own evil will, from that uprightness in which God at first made him, he became depraved. Therefore the damnable origin should be blamed, that from the grief of correction the will of regeneration may arise, if he who is corrected is a child of promise, that God may by his secret inspiration work within him both to will and to do. To this I add a passage very similar, from Epist. 105. Pelagius objects, What are we to do, who live wickedly, since we have not received grace from whence we should live well? Augustine replies merely, They cannot truly say they have done no evil, who of their own accord live wickedly. And a little after, They may impute this to themselves, who are of that mass, which God hath deservedly and justly condemned on account of the sin of one. tis to be observed, that in both these passages Augustine allows that there are some to whom God hath denied his grace; and also, that those to whom it is not given, cannot take it to themselves; and further, that original guilt and depravity is a sufficient reason why God should deny the grace of Christ to any one, according to his own will. Moreover, it is also to be observed, that Augustine does not imagine that the saving grace of Christ is any thing offered to the human will, which knocks in order that 1t may gain admittance, but something communicated, which heals and quickens the will to which it is given. The last testimony which we shall produce from Augustine is contained in Epist. 107, where he enumerates against the Pelagians twelve opinions relating to the catholic faith, the fourth of which is, We know that the grace of God is not given to all men. But lest any one should pretend, that by the death of Christ it was effected, that grace is prepared for and offered to all, although it may be possessed or not, according as men are willing or not to accept it ; this opinion also is excluded in the fifth and sixth: of which we shall speak more hereafter. From Augustine let us proceed to Prosper. He says (ad excerpta Genuens. resp. ad dub. 4, When the word of truth is preached, some willingly believe it, others do not believe it ; but it is because God opens the hearts of some, and does not open the hearts of others. Which is the same as if he had said, that the grace of faith is given to some, and denied to others. And (resp. ad dub. 8,) What else can we say of the Tyrians and Sidonians, than that it was not given to them to believe? But why it was dented to them, let them say tf they can, &c. Prosper asserts two things: first, that the gift of faith is denied to some men: secondly, that the cause why it is denied, is inscrutable. Lastly, in his book de Ingratis, (cap. 6) he states it to be an error of the Pelagians,
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Quod sine delectu sen lex seu gratia Christi
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Omnem hominem salvare velit; donümque vocantis
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Sic sit propositum ut nullus non possit ad illud
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Libertate suá proprióque vigore venire.
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->That without any choice, or law, or grace of Christ, he wills the salvation of every man; and the gift of calling is so proposed that there is no one but might come to tt by his own freedom and strength.
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->Then he paints the opinion of the Semipelagians in these colours, cap. 10;
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Gratia qua Christi populus sumus hoccohibetur — :
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Limite vobiscum, et formam banc adscribitis illi ;
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Ut cunctos vocet ilia quidem invitetque, nee ulium
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Preteriens, studeat communem adferre salutem
[VERSE] <!--v2p512-->Omnibus, &c. '
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->The grace by which we become the people of Christ is restrained by you in this limit, and you ascribe this form to it ; that it calls and invites all, and not passing by any, endeavours to bring a common salvation to all, &c.
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->eso Dic, unde probes quod gratia Christi,
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->Nullum omnino hominem de cunctis qui generantur.
[BODY] <!--v2p512-->Przetereat ?
[BODY] <!--v2p512-513-->Tell me, from whence you can prove that the grace of Christ does not pass by any man at. all of all who are born? Therefore, any one who contends that grace is given to all, is esteemed by Prosper to have the fibres of Pelagian virulence. Let us now hear Fulgentius. In his book (de verit. Predest. Biblioth. Patr. tom. 6, p. 158,) he has these words, The holy Fathers who held the truth of Apostolical preaching most certainly knew, and left it in their books to be known, that the grace of Christ is not given to all men generally, A little after, We should not therefore think that the grace of God is given to all men. For all men have not faith, and some do not receive the love of God that they may be saved. In whom, nevertheless, it is the fault of the human will, that they do not believe or love God, which, as long as grace, the gift of God, does not change, either does not understand the commands of God, or despises them when understood, &c. Again, No man can desire, or ask for, or even know this grace, unless he should first receive it from God. What is more plain, if Fulgentius be believed, than that quickening grace is not given by God to all men, and that it cannot be possessed by any one to whom it is not given from above? If plainer words are wanted, I add (from the book de Incarnat. & Grat. Jesu Christi, p. 89,) God who prepares the will, himself also gives it. If God should not give it to man by his grace, man can never be willing to believe in God, because grace does not find this will, but works it in man. You see that the opinion of those Fathers who opposed the Pelagians and Semipelagians, is in agreement; That quickening and saving grace is not given to all men, and that a vitiated will can indeed, from its own depravity, loathe the grace which is not given to it, and repel it when it is offered in the external means, but it cannot lay hold of and take to itself this quickening grace by the strength of its own innate liberty.
[BODY] <!--v2p513-->But since the very marrow of Pelagianism consists in the way in which they pretend that quickening grace is administered to men by God, and is accepted by men, let us shew what the adherents to the Pelagian faction, and what the orthodox Fathers, state on this subject, by bringing forward the testimonies on both sides.
[BODY] <!--v2p513-514-->With respect to the Pelagians. They maintain that quickening and regenerating grace so flows to all men from the death and merit of Christ, through the mercy of God, that to be quickened and regenerated, or not to be quickened and regencrated, depends primarily on the will of man embracing or despising grace. To this then their opinion amounts, That saving grace is offered to all men, in Christ, of the pure mercy of God, but is given to no one of his absolute good pleasure. But if it should be particularly inquired, Why is the saving grace of Christ given to one, and not given to others? they answer, Because one is willing to receive it when it is offered, the other is unwilling. But let them speak for themselves. Vitalis of Carthage* (apud Augustinum, Epist. 107) contends, that grace Sollows the will of man, and is given to men because they are willing to receive it. The remnants of the Pelagian heresy, the Massilians,f say, (apud Prosperum in Epist. ad Augustin.) As far as it pertains to God, eternal life is prepared Jar all; but as far as it relates to the freedom of the will, it is apprehended by those who of their own accord believe in God, and receive the help of grace through the merit of their believing. Pelagius himself says, (apud Augustin. de Grat, Christi. contra P. & C. lib. 1, cap. 31, p. 781) That men who make a good use of their free-will deserve the grace of God, but others having a free-will, by which they may come to faith, and merit the grace of God, through making a bad use of their freedom, are destitute of grace and incur damnation, Faustus of Rheis says, It is of the goodness of God, that man 1s called, it is of his own wil/ that he readily obeys.
[BODY] <!--v2p514-515-->But let us turn from the antient Pelagians and Semipelagians, to those who abominate the naue of Pelagians, but are not averse from their error. In this class I place those Papists who teach that grace is efficacious through the consent of the human will; so that if it should happen that the will assented, then God would grant quickening grace, but if it should resist, then the operation of God, who is willing to quicken and regenerate the soul, is rendered vain, Among these also I think Arnünius and his disciples are to be numbered, who suspend the giving or denying of saving grace upon the will of man, so that they say, That God does not will the conversion and regeneration of any one of his absolute good pleasure, but that he wills the conversion and regeneration of all on this condition, viz. if they should not resist his exciting grace, but he leaves them unconverted, if they do resist it. Thus the Remonstrants speak, (Acta Synod. p. 21, Explic. 3, & 4 art.) If the reason be inquired why one is converted and not another, it is answered, One is converted because God converts him, since he doesnot oppose new contumacy ; the other 1s not converted, because he opposes a new contumacy. In which they state the reason of the gift and denial of Divine and saving grace to arise from the different acts of the human will, but a deep silence is always observed by them on the subject of God removing, of his special mercy, the stony and rebellious heart, or his not removing it, according to the liberty of his own will. Thus also Corvinus does not ascribe it to the difference of Divine, but of human will, that we have or have not that grace by which we are converted and saved. (Contra Bogerman, p. 263.) I¢ 1s certain, the conversion of no one in particular is intended by God. A little after, Granting all the operations which God makes use of to effect conversion in us, still conversion remains so much in our power that we cannot be converted. Such is their opinion.
[BODY] <!--v2p515-517-->But very different is that of the holy and orthodox Fathers. They taught that the grace which quickens, regenerates, and converts the soul, was not given or denied according to the assent or dissent of free-will, but according to the gratuitous and absolute will of God, as he is willing or unwilling to take away the innate hardness of the human heart. Let us produce Augustine in the first place, who, always admitting the accomplishment of the work of human redemption on the cross, contends that some have grace because God of his special mercy hath wrought in them that they should receive it; and that others have it not, because God did not choose to soften their rebellious hardness by having compassion upon them. What he has stated is very plain, (Retract. lib. 1, cap. 10) What I have said, that all men are able to turn themselves to fulfil the commands of God, if they are willing, let not the Pelagians think that is spoken according to their opinion. For it is altogether true that all men can do this if they will; but the will is prepared by the Lord, and ts so much increased by the gift of love, that they are able to do it. From which words it appears, that the conversion of the human will to God does not depend on this condition, if it is willing to obey of its own excitement; but that the will and the power depend on the preparation of God, and the gift of love. Again, Augustine says, (Epist. 107) How is it said, that all men would receive grace, if those to whom it is not given did not refuse it of their own will, when it is not given to many infants. who have not a contrary will? And shortly after, How are the merits of the human will weighed in this matter, since those to whom that grace is not given are in a similar condition with those to whom it is given, and yet by the just judgment of God it ts not gives to them? But let us hear the sentiments of others. Prosper says, Who disputes that free-will becomes obedient to the exhortation of him: that calls, when the grace of God hath begotten in it the desire of believing and obeying? The grace of God is not therefore given to the will on condition of obedience, but having been given, it produces obedience. Aguiin (De vocat. Gent. lib. 1, cap 18,) The will of God is the cause of receiving grace in all men of every condition and age; with him the reason of election is concealed ; from that grace desert arises, but tt is veceived without merit. This testimony is to be observed, because although this author, whoever he was, contends that the help is not totally taken away from any men, yet he does not think that it is so offered to all, that the difference why one receives it and another does not, is referred to this, that one is willing to receive it, the other to resist it; but he refers the cause of the reception of grace to the secret election of God, and consequently also the cause of its not being received, as far as it is a mere denial, to the secret non-election of God. But if it should be considered as a moral omission on the part of men who resist grace, then it is to be referred to the corruption of mankind. But to proceed. Fulgentius every where refutes this error of the Pelagians, who think that saving grace is procured for and offered to all men in Christ the Redeemer, as it were on this condition, that some should have it, because they were willing to receive it, others should be destitute of it, because they chose to repel it. But he teaches that a good will was given to some, and that it could not but be repelled by all to whom it is not given. We produced some of his testimonies before, we will now subjoin some others. (Lib. 1, de ver. Predest. p. 158,) Not indeed because we will, do we receive grace, but neither is grace given tous whilst we are willing. A little after, p. 159, Grace alone prodaces a good will in us, it alone gives faith to the will, The will, which has not faith, cannot have any merit of faith to be received, because not to have faith is to displease God. Again, (lib. 2, not far from the beginning, p. 160) Jt is the part of God to give his grace to what men he will, and as much as he will. He does not give it as due to the wills or works of men, but being merciful and kind, he gratuitously pours it into the hearts of those whom he has enlightened. And therefore he freely grants it to whom he will, and as much as he will, because he is not invited by any beginning of good will, nor by the effect of any good work, before he bestows grace. These things are a death-blow to Pelagian and also to Arminian sentiments, which state that quickening and saving grace (of which Fulgentius speaks) are prepared or given to no one according to the purpose of the election of God, but are contingently given or denied to some according to the different condition of the human will obeying or opposing it: which theology displeased even the sounder Papists. A few testimonies of whom we shall add by way of overweight.
[BODY] <!--v2p517-518-->Dominicus Bannes (in 1, Aquin. qu. 32, conclus. ult. p. 278) says, God determined from eternity, by a will either ab solute or consequent, not to give to all men supernatural assistance. But tf any one should inquire why he rather confers these gifts on some persons in particular, but deuies them to others, this depends on the simple will of God, neither is any reason of it to be sought, as Augustine and Thomas teach us. A little after, Therefore let the Christian and humble divine learn with Thomas and Augustine to be ignorant, rather than with the curious to be wise more than he ought, lest he should fall into the Pelagian heresy, by referring a difference of this kind to free-will, as tts first and radical cause, namely, Because one was willing to be converted, the other was not willing. He adds further what strikes at the sinews of the Pelagian and Arminian theology, The concurrence of free-will is an effect necessarily consequent, by the necessity of consequence, from Divine efficacious aid. In these words the learned Bannes rejects and condemns the opinion of those who contend that regenerating and saving grace are procured for and set before all men on account of the merit of Christ. And he also refutes those who resolve the reason why some are regenerated or converted, and others are not, into the willing and refusing of mankind. And he further teaches, that our concurrence or non-resistance, that is, our being willing is the necessary effect of effectual grace given, and therefore is not the reason of its being given or received.
[BODY] <!--v2p518-519-->Alvarez (De auxiliis Divine grat. disp. 58, p 262) says, If we should assert that there was a law made by God, for in- Jallibly giving effectual aid to those that well used, or were willing to use sufficient aid of their own innate liberty alone, then the beginning of effectual grace would be from nature, and from the innate liberty of the man, who is willing to make a good use of sufficient aid. This is the very law or decree of God which is contended for with such earnestness by Arminius, Corvinus, and other Divines of the same school. For they say, that sufficient grace is given to all, on account of the merit of Christ, the Mediator; but that effectual grace, or that which actually converts and regenerates, is given on this condition, if they make a good use of it when it excites them, or is sufficient for them; that is, if the will, being excited by grace and made able, puts forth its innate power of willing; which is ascribing the beginning of effectual grace to nature. Alvarez says again, (ibid.) This conclusion is false ; Because man being excited by God is willing to consent, therefore he is assisted. But this is true: Because man being excited by sufficient grace is assisted with effectual aid, therefore he co-operates. Which he fully proves (Disp. 99,) where he also asserts that this proposition is most true, Because God wills that man should will, therefore man wills. These things are diametrically opposed to the opinions of the Arminians, who deny that any antecedent will of God is the cause why some believe rather than others, and are converted and effectually saved ; and refer all this difference to the antecedent will of men, who, when they are excited by grace common to others, are willing beyond others to believe, to convert themselves, to lay hold of salvation.
[BODY] <!--v2p519-->William Estius,* formerly Professor in the Academy of Douay, (in 1 Sentent. disp. 46, sec. 2, p. 222) says, We ought not to imagine in God any will, desire, or endeavour, by which he wills, endeavours, strives, and as far as he can ef- Sects, that all men should be saved. which nevertheless does not therefore follow, because the bad will of man resists his good will, and through its prevailing and hindering, the will of God ais frustrated. But this is almost all which some contend was procured by the death of Christ, namely, that God, by offering saving grace to all men promiscuously, is willing to save those who of their own accord apply themselves to obtain his grace, and condemns those who resist it.
[BODY] <!--v2p519-520-->In the last place, Bellarmin may be produced, who does not acknowledge that there is any decree of God connected with the death of Christ, by which God hath determined to give effectual or actually regenerating grace to all men on this condition, If they should not refuse it of their own will. (Lib. 1, de Grat. & lib. arbitr. cap. 12) He rejects the opinion of those who teach that it is in the power of men to make that grace effectual, which otherwise would not of itself be more than sufficient. He shews that they oppose Augustine and the holy Scriptures, who say, that all men would receive the grace of God, if those to whom it is not given did not refuse it of their own will. (Page 423.) And further, he urges his opinion with this objection, That af effectual calling did not depend on the purpose of God, but on human will, no room would be left for predestination. To which may be added (lib. 1, cap. 1, p. 455,) We believe that God of his absolute will will save many, both children and adults, and that of his absolute will he will not save others. (See Augustini Enchiridion, cap. 102, 103.)
[BODY] <!--v2p520-->But to what purpose are so many testimonies concerning grace and free-will, when we are employed in explaining the question concerning the death of Christ, as far as it is considered as an universal cause of human salvation? Truly, because the Pelagians formerly taught, and many are now fallen into the same opinion, which asserts, That, through the death and merit of Christ the Redeemer, saving or effectual grace is equally set before all men, to be granted on this condition, If they should not refuse it of their own will; and is denied on this condition, If they should refuse it: as if the death of Christ had been granted to men of the pure mercy of God, but effectual or saving grace flowed to men according as they made a good or bad use of their free-will in exciting, embracing, or repelling grace, and salvation was given to those who were willing to be saved from the fountain of their own willing, as Prosper sang, (lib. de Ingratis, cap. 6.)
[BODY] <!--v2p520-521-->In this Dissertation then,-concerning the universal efficacy of the death of Christ, as it was our design to shew, against those who endeavour to limit it, That it wasa kind of universal covenant, established with the whole human race, concerning the giving of remission and eternal life to all men individually on condition of faith;—so it was also to be demonstrated, against those who extend this universal efficacy of the death of Christ beyond its proper limits, That no law, no decree was established, in the appointment of the death of Christ, concerning the giving of the means of supernatural grace, or concerning the giving of saving or effectual grace itself to all men on the condition, If they make a good or not a bad use of the light of nature; or on the condition, If of their own will they should not refuse it. Therefore, the death of Christ being granted, God is bound by his faithfulness, according to the covenant of the Gospel, to give remission of sins and eternal life to every one that believes and repents; but by no covenant is he bound to give faith itself, love, or saving grace to him that excels another in acting by the strength of his free-will. Moreover, the gift or denial of effectual and saving grace, the death of Christ being granted, remains as free to God, as the gift of Christ himself was, which is understood not to be due or given to any acts of the human will. Therefore the obtaining or not obtaining of effectual and saving grace, is to be referred in its first origin, to the purpose of God in shewing mercy and pity, or not shewing it; and not to the free-will of man choosing or not choosing. Hitherto we have disputed of the death of Christ as far as its virtue and efficacy pertains to all men. In what follows, we shall explain it as far as it is limited to the elect children of God.
[H1] 7|CHAPTER VII
[H2] OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST, AS IT REGARDS THE PREDESTINATED ALONE
[BODY] <!--v2p522-525-->Hitherto we have treated of the death of Christ as it regards the whole human race, in the universal circuit of his quickening power to be brought into act under the condition of faith, as to every man. For although, through. the want of this condition, the death of Christ does not display its saving virtue in the greater part of men, yet it is not to be denied, that the Scriptures every where clearly testify, nor is it to be doubted, but God had in himself the most just and wise reasons of his counsel, while he determined that the death of his Son should be applicable to all men on condition of faith, and nevertheless did not determine to effect or procure that it should be applied to all by the gift of faith to each individual. We ought not, therefore, to oppose to each other and clash together these Divine decrees, I will that my Son should so offer himself on the cross for the sins of the human race, that all men individually may .be saved by believing in him ;—and—1 will so dispense my efficacious grace that not all, but the elect only, may receive this saving faith, whereby they may be saved. If these two decrees seem to any one to oppose each other, he ought rather to acknowledge the weakness of his own understanding, than to deny any. of those things which are so plainly contained in the holy Scriptures. Let this, then, be fixed and established, That according to the decree of God himself, Christ was so offered on the cross for all men, that his death is a kind of universal remedy appointed for all men individually, in order to obtain remission of sins and eternal life, to be applied by faith. But now, lest under this universal virtue of the death of Christ, which extends to all rational creatures, we should destroy its special efficacy, which actually pertains to the predestinated alone, we shall enter upon the other part of the discussion we undertook, which will explain and defend the special prerogative of the elect in the death of Christ, both from the will of God the Father in giving his Son to death, and that of the Son in offering himself. For we ought not so to contend that Christ died for all, as to believe with the Pelagians, that the quickening efficacy of his death is at the same time common to all, from the intention of the Divine will, but in its event becomes saving to some and not to others, no otherwise than from the contingent use of human liberty. Nor are we to fancy with the Arminians, that God gave his Son to death absolutely intending nothing more than that from thence he might have a mere power of saving some sinners, notwithstanding his justice, and that any sinners might have a way or means by which they might be saved, notwithstanding their own sin. Hence arises that celebrated corollary of Grevinchovius,* in his dissertation on the death of Christ (p. 9,) That the dignity, necessity, and usefulness of redemption might abundantly appear by its being obtained, even though it should never be actually applied to any individual. Again (p. 14,) That the redemption might be obtained for all, and yet applied to none on account of their unbelief. But we by no means think that the death of Christ was like the cast of dice, but that it was decreed from eternity by God the Father and Christ, through the merit of his death, infallibly to save some certain persons whom the Scripture marks by the name of the elect; and therefore, that, according to the will of God, the death of Christ was, by some special mode and counsel, offered and accepted for their redemption. Nor is it here necessary, for the defence of this special counsel, to define that thorny question which has been tossed about by many, and vexed all who have undertaken to discuss it, viz. Whether that decree was first, by which certain persons are predestinated to the infallible participation of eternal life; or the other, by which Christ was ordained to his mediatorial office. For although, to sustain the weakness of the human understanding, we are compelled to conceive of some of the eternal decrees of God as prior and some as posterior, yet it seems to me a slippery and ' very dangerous thing to contend about these imaginary signs of our reason, as to undertake to establish and to refute from them questions of faith. It ought, indeed, to be placed beyond all doubt, that those decrees of God, which are thought of by us according to the order of prior and posterior, with respect to God himself consist of an equable eternity of infinity; neither can or ought any separate moment to be granted, in which one decree having been established, it can be rightly supposed, that the other is not yet foreseen and established. Conceive, therefore, that first in order was the decree of God concerning the appointment and sending of a Mediator (which seems to me more suited to our mode of understanding,) and that afterwards was the decree concerning the choice of certain persons to the infrustrable attainment of eternal life through the appointed Mediator; yet you can never so separate these, as that the passion of the Mediator would not have been foreseen from eternity, as offered in some special way and regard for those persons who were to be chosen, and accepted as if it were offered by God for them specially, and that from eternity. On the other hand, conceive that first in order was the decree concerning the election of certain persons to salvation ; that afterwards was the decree concerning the destination of Christ to the office of Mediator, yet you could never so separate these, as that the passion of Christ, which was specially offered and accepted for them, should not be the cause of preparing and giving to those elect persons both effectual grace and salvation. Since, therefore, both these opinions are the same for our purpose, we shall dismiss the discussion of a thing so very unnecessary, and propose and confirm one thesis only respecting the death of Christ as limited by some special consideration to the predestinated alone ; which is as follows,
[BODY] <!--v2p525-->The death vf Christ, from the special design of God the Father, who from eternity ordained and accepted that sacrifice; and of Christ, who offered it in the fulness of time to God the Father ; was destined for some certain persons, whom the Scripture calls the elect, and for them alone, so as to be effectually and infallibly applied to the obtaining of eternal life.
[BODY] <!--v2p525-526-->We oppose this proposition to the error of the Arminians, which Grevinchovius endeavours to establish, ( Dissert. de morte Christi, p. 7) where he teaches that God, delivering up his Son, intended the obtaining of a reconciliation common to all men individually, but did not absolutely will the application of it, when obtained, to any of the children of men. J acknowledge, says he, in God in- : deed a constant and perpetual desire of applying to all men individually the good obtained ; but 1 deny that the application itself was destined by the certain counsel and will of God for any man but him that believeth. This modern innovator, then, thinks that God equally willed eternal life in Christ to all men, and that he did not, by his absolute and antecedent will, destine and prepare for any effectual grace, whereby Christ might be infallibly applied to them ; but that, by his eternal foreknowledge, he foresaw that some would believe, and some would remain in unbelief, and then at length destined to believers, as such, an effectual application of the death and merits of Jesus Christ. But we think, that, in predestination to faith, the application of the death of Christ was infallibly destined for some certain persons ; and we say that this faith is not prepared for believers, as such, but for unbelievers, that through it they may become believers. The application therefore, which is not destined, but made, is understood as regarding men.who are considered as believers; but the application which is destined, is understood as regarding those to whom faith is destined to be given, by which this application may be made. But these are the elect, and the elect alone; whose special prerogative it is, that according to the absolute will of God the Father and of Christ the Mediator, they are decreed and caused to be infallibly saved through the death of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p526-->These things having been premised, let us proceed to our argument, and in the first place treat of the clear testimonies of the Scriptures.
[BODY] <!--v2p526-528-->1. To this purport, in the first place, are those passages which mention the absolute will of the Father with respect to giving, and, as it were, commending certain persons to the Mediator, with the design that from him and through him they may receive all things necessary to salvation, and at length salvation itself. (John vi. 37, 39,) All that the Father giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out; aud this 1s the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, &c. lt is evident from the contest, that not all men promiscuously, but some persons in particular, were given to the Mediator by the mercy of God the Father, according to a certain gracious purpose of infallibly and effectually bringing these persons to eternal life. A similar passage is (John xvii. 2) Thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. This special giving cannot be understood to have been done otherwise than in eternal election. But no one can justly doubt that those who were thus given to the Redeemer, have a special prerogative in the work of redemption. Certainly, the Apostle has plainly signified it in Ephes. 1. 4, 5, 6, &c. According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, &c. having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, &c. Here you have the special gift of certain persons known to God alone. Then in verse 7 it is shewn, that according to the purpose of God, the same persons always obtain that redemption which is effectually applied through the Mediator, In whom we have redemption through his blood, &c. Those, therefore, who are specially given to Christ by election, always derive faith, remission of sins, sanctification, and salvation from the death of Christ, or the beneficial application of his being given to them, at the same time. St. Augustine understood nothing else than eternal election by this giving. (In Johan. tract. 107) He says, The Father would not have given them to the Son, unless he had elected them. And (De predest. Sanctor. cap. 16) he demonstrates, that those who were thus given to the Son, were also called in such a peculiar manner, that Christ crucified should not become to them a stumblingblock or foolishness, but the power and wisdom of God, effectually to work in them faith and salvation. See the words of the Author, which I omit for the sake of brevity. Therefore, it must either be denied that some certain persons were specially given to Christ the Mediator by God the Father, or it must at the same time be confessed that the Mediator had a special regard to them in his offering. . 2. Secondly, the same is evinced by those passages which teach that Christ, conscious of the will of the Father, by his special care directs and infallibly brings to salvation the aforesaid persons who were specially given to him. Which would not be done beyond doubt, unless the death of Christ, which is the meritorious cause of all-saving grace granted to us, had been by some special design destined for these persons, as saving and quickening them. But let us observe the words of Scripture, (John xvii. 9) T pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which Thou hast given me, for they are thine. And ver. 12, Those that thou gavest me I have kept. And ver. 19, For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanct:fied through the truth. Nothing is more clear than that two things are affirmed in these passages; First, That not all men pronuscuously, but some persons especially, were given by Chap. vit. AS 1T REGARDS THE PREDESTINATED. 519 God the Father to Christ the Mediator, which it has been shewn is to be understood of the elect. Secondly, That Christ in discharging his office of Mediator and Saviour, embracés and regards them with a special love, attention, and care, that is, with such love, attention, and care as may produce in them the infallible effect of eternal life. Which manifestly appears from Heb. 11. 13, where Christ represents to his Father that those children who had been given to him by his Father were preserved and saved, Behold, I and the children which God hath given me. Now that we may bring all these things into a small compass, Those whom Christ commended to the Father by special intercession, that is, by absolute prayer, as Bannes expresses it (in 1, qu. 23, art. 5, p. 297,) or as Suares says (in 3, tom. ' 1, quest. 19, disp. 31, p. 634,) for whom he prayed with an effectual and absolute will, that the merit of his death might be effectually applied to them; for the preserving and keeping of whom he watched in an extraordinary manner ; for whom he so sanctified himself, that they might effectually receive from him that sanctification which is produced in the hearts of those who are saved by the doctrine of the Gospel, and moreover, whom he will place altogether at length before his Father safe and glorious: these persons, beyond all controversy, he also embraced with a special design in the very act of his offering, and so likewise in the whole work of redemption. For it is absurd to say, that by a special design, salvation was procured by the Mediator for those persons for whom the death of Christ, which is the cause of the salvation of mankind, was not destined by a special design.
[BODY] <!--v2p528-531-->3. A third argument is derived from those Scriptures in which the death of Christ, when joined, and as it were connected with his certain and absolute purpose of giving eternal life, is not extended to all men, but is limited to certain persons, and that according to the special design of Christ himself. Such as (John x. 15) I lay down my life Jar the sheep. (John xi. 51, 52) He prophesied that Jesus should die, &c. that he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad. (Ephes. v. 25, 26) Christ loved the church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, &c. (Tit. ii. 14) Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar people, &c. (Acts xx. 28) Feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. (Ephes. i. 22, 23) He gave him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body. (Eph. v. 28) Christ is the head of the church, and he is the Saviour of the body. In all these passages three things are to be observed: first, That by the names of sheep, the church, the children of God, the body of Christ, are intended the sheep, the children of God, and members of Christ, not as actually united to him by faith already received, but as by the counsel and design of God to be united by faith to be received. Secondly, That the whole human race promiscuously cannot be meant by these titles. Thirdly, When it is said that Christ died that he might gather together in one these children of God, that he might sanctify this church, that he might purchase this church, &c. there is not denoted in Christ’s offering himself an ineffectual will, or some conditional design, which might fail of the intended effect; but an effectual will and design joined with an infallible event. It is proved in the first place, That his discourse in the passages aforesaid, is concerning his sheep, his members, his children considered according to the eternal and secret purpose of Divine election, and not according to their actual present state; Because no one actually becomes a sheep of Christ, a child of God, a member of his mystical body, except by the merit and benefit of the death of Christ actually and effectually derived and applied to him: therefore, Christ died for the sheep, for the children of God, for the church, for the members destined for him from eternity according to the purpose of election, namely, that by the merit of the death of Christ this predestination of God might be accomplished in them. Thus Augustine says (in Johan. tract. 46,) The Lord knoweth them that are his; they are his sheep, according to his predestination, according to his foreknowledge, according to his election of the sheep, before the formation of the world. And (Tract 49, page 366) he thus speaks of the children of God that were scattered abroad. These things are said according to predestination: For they were not as yet the sheep or the children of God, because they had not yel believed. It is proved, Secondly, That in the passages alleged, the death of Christ is said to be limited to certain persons for some special reason. For otherwise why would the Scripture have mentioned sheep, children, or the church, if it wished to mark that it is extended to all? It would have been in vain to make use of words which desctibe a small part of the human race, unless it had also shewn tliat the design of Christ in this thing did not regard the whole human race, but referred to those few only. The death of Christ, and . the design of God embracing all mankind promiscuously is excellently expressed, John iii. 16, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. But he so loved his sheep, his children, his church, that he determined by his death effectually to derive to them faith and eternal life. As often as the holy Scripture makes mention of the death of Christ in reference alone to the church, the sheep, the members of his mystical body, it would unfold to us the special design of Christ in offering himself, arising from his special love; according as Aquinas says (Part. 3, qu. 24, art. 4,) God_fore-ordained the salvation of the elect, by predestinating from eternity, that it should be accomplished through Jesus Christ. It is proved, Thirdly, That in the passages aforesaid, it is shewn that the will of God the Father and of Christ, concerning the salvation of the sheep by the death of Christ, is not ineffectual or conditional, but absolute and effectual ; Because Christ speaking of the same sheep, says, (John x. 28) I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish : and (John xvii. 24) Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am. And (Eph. v. 23) the Apostle says of that church for which Christ gave himself, Christ is the head of the church, and he is the Saviour of the body. These passages all express an absolute will joined with its effect, Therefore Christ is truly called the Saviour and Redeemer of the world, inasmuch as he hath brought to the whole world a saving remedy, which is applicable by faith. But he is the Saviour and Redeemer of his sheep, his church, his body, in short, of the predestinated children of God, inasmuch as by his special design he hath destined and procured this remedy to be applied to them, by granting to them that the eyes of their understanding should be enlightened (Eph. i. 18,) that by faith they might possess Christ effectually united and applied to them.
[BODY] <!--v2p531-533-->4. Lastly, we may confirm our opinion by those passages in which God hath absolutely promised to Christ, on his dying, that by the merit of his death the church should be infallibly delivered from death, and put in possession of eternal life. (Gen. iii. 15) The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpeut's head. What else does this mean, but that by the virtue and merit of the death of Christ, Satan should be trodden down, and all those should be delivered from his power whom God in Christ willed specially to pity? Now who can doubt that Christ, by a special design, referred his death, which was to destroy Satan, to those who, by a special benefit, were to be delivered through him ? But that those who were infallibly to be delivered were the elect, is allowed by all sound Divines. Rupert (lib. 2, de victoria Verbi Dei, cap. 18) says, He calls the elect by name the conquerors of the serpent; because, truly, the efficacy of the death and resurrection of Christ to bruise the devil is of his special mercy destined and procured to be effectually applied to them alone. From whence Marloratus* says on this passage, The devil and the generation of the wicked fight against the elect of God; but the elect at length come off the victors, on account of their head, even Christ, who by his death hath destroyed him that had the power of death. Therefore the death of Christ was specially intended and destined to bruise Satan under the feet of the elect, and effectually to save them, and that according to the most sure promise of God himself. A promise not dissimilar of. - God the Father concerning the efficacy of the death of Christ as to the elect, is contained in Isaiah liii. 10, 11. The words are these, When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shuil see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand ; he shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied, &c. In these words God the Father promises to the Son, that his pas-. sion and death should not be useless or without fruit, but a seed should undoubtedly be brought forth to him. I ask then, whether this promise regards vague and uncertain individuals, or certain persons specifically known to God the Father and Christ the Mediator? Without doubt it would be most unworthy of Divine perfection and wisdom to form a confused promise concerning the salvation of some persons, who were not then specifically marked out by God himself. But if a determination were made by God and Christ concerning the effectual salvation of this seed through the death of Christ, it would follow, that there had been an effectual and specific design with regard * to their salvation, in the death of Christ. All the interpreters of this passage have so understood it, as to allow that by the death of Christ a most effectual and most certain deliverance and salvation was promised to his mystical body, thatis, the church, or the elect. Thus Luther says, The posterity or seed of which he speaks, is the church. He SHALL SEE HIS SEED, that is, he shall havea kingdom and royal children. So Calvin observes, HE SHALL SEE HIS SEED, signifies that the death of Christ would be the cause of begetting an offspring, because having died and risen again, he should acquire to himself a peculiar people. Musculus does not disagree when explaining the words, He shall see of the travail of his soul and shall be satisfied. Christ saw beforehand the flowing together of the elect to be saved ; he sees it even now, and he shall see it to the end of the world ; and he is satisfied with seeing it, because the pleasure of God his Father prospers in his hand. "These all agree that, according to the special good pleasure of God the Father, the effectual salvation of the church, that is, of some certain persons known to God alone, was promised to Christ, as the fruit of his passion; and that Christ intended with a specific and effectual will, and laboured for the salvation of these elect persons, or this peculiar people individually given and commended to him by God the Father,
[BODY] <!--v2p533-534-->Objection. If any one should object with Grevinchovius, (Dissert. de morte Chr. p. 8 and 14) That there was not any absolute promise or will of God concerning the effectual redemption of any individual persons, but that God willed or did not will the application of the death of Christ to all men individually not absolutely but conditionally ; He willed it to all if they had faith ; he did not will it if they disbelieved : and therefore, although Christ laid down his life, it was possible nevertheless that his death might not be applied to any; that is, it was possible that he might be defrauded of his promised seed, on account of the unbelief of all men intervening.
[BODY] <!--v2p534-->Reply. I answer, that in this promise, by which God the Father as it were bound himself to the Mediator, to give him a seed, if he should lay down his soul for sin, a tacit promise is contained of giving faith to the elect, without which they would not be the seed of Christ. It was therefore decreed by God on account of the death of his Son, to give faith to some persons, as well as to give a progeny to his Son which should live for ever. Christ being aware beforehand of this promise and counsel, could not offer the sacrifice of his death to God the Father, without a special design for this seed, who should hereafter believe in him.—So far we have contended from ex- press testimonies of the Scriptures; let us now bring forward some arguments founded also in the holy Scriptures.
[BODY] <!--v2p534-535-->Argument l. He who by his death not only established the evangelical covenant which regards all men promiscuously, Whosoever believeth shall be saved ; but also that secret covenant which comprehends some certain individual persons known only to God, and which is described by the Prophet (Jerem. xxxi. 33) in these words, This is the covenant that 1 will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people; He who by his death procured such a covenant, offered his death and merit to God the Father that it might be effectually applied to some elect persons. This proposition is clear and evident, because to put his laws into the minds of men, and to write them in their hearts, and to make them a peculiar people to God, denotes an effectual application of the merits of Christ, and describes the privileges of the elect, or the spiritual Israel. Now I add the minor, and affirm, That Christ, by his death, is the Mediator of this secret covenant, which includes its application, and embraces the Israel of God, or the elect children of God, and them alone. Besides the words of the prophet just quoted, we have also the clear testimony of the Apostle, citing the same prophet, (Heb, viii, 6) Our High Priest is the Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. But what are those better promises which Christ the Mediator hath established ? They are recounted verse 10, in the words which are recorded by Jeremiah, and are divided into two heads, into a promise of inward reformation of the hearts, and of gratuitous remission of sins, as Calvin has well observed on this passage. Christ therefore, by his death, hath merited remission of sins for all, if they should believe and be converted ; but he hath merited and procured for some, that this gratuitous and secret covenant should be fulfilled by God who hath promised it, namely, that they should believe and be converted by God's effectually reforming their hearts through and on account of the Mediator, and putting his laws in them. But these persons for whom Christ hath merited this are (as Bede hath observed from Augustine) al/ pertaining spiritually to the house of Israel and the seed of. Abraham ; and what else is this but all the elect? Therefore the elect according to the intention of God and Christ, have the special benefit of a profitable application, on account of the death of Christ, both destined for and presented to them.
[BODY] <!--v2p535-536-->ARGUMENT 2, May be drawn from the consideration of the price paid on the cross for the redemption of the human race. This price was the blood of the Son of God, of the only begotten and beloved Son. But it is not to be believed, that such and so great a price was paid for an event dependent on the uncertain determination of the human will: Therefore it was the design and intention of God the Father and Christ the Mediator infallibly and effectually to redeem and to save some men by this precious death. But these could not be any others than those who are really saved, that is, than the elect: Therefore the intention of Christ in offering himself regarded the elect in some special manner. I know that Grevinchovius and others of the same school, boldly assert, (Dissert. de mort. Chr. p. 14, 15) That the proper end obtained and designed by God was, that the sinner might be saved, notwithstanding his Justice ; but that this redemption, although obtained for all, might possibly be applied to none, on account of the intervention of the unbelief of all. Which is the same as if they should say, that God so gave his Son to death, that at the same time he had no certain purpose of saving any inen by the merit of his death ; but having procured the bare possibility of salvation, through the death of Christ, for all men generally, he committed the effectual participation of salvation to the free-will of each individual, so that the death of Christ, considered in the whole latitude of its merit, could not have effectually redeemed any one from death. But whoever rightly considers how precious the death of the Son was in the eyes of the Father, could not think that he would have been willing to expose his Son to death, without a certain purpose of effectually applying his death to some persons. (Isa. liii. 10) The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. ear what Malderus says, a Popish writer, but much sounder in this matter than the Arminians. (Anti Synod. p. 138) If the offering alone be regarded, it is equally for all ; but it is otherwise, if that should be regarded, for the actual obtainiug of which he offered himself. For he obtained for the elect the perfect benefit of his passion actually following and applied, as though they were given to him by the Father for this purpose. The blood of Christ, then, could not flow in vain, because by the price of his blood, according to the decree of God, he merited for the elect the beneficial application of that price.
[BODY] <!--v2p536-537-->ARGUMENT 3. Whatever of spiritual and saving good the Spirit of Christ produces in any persons, the bloodshedding of Christ merited it for them: But the Spirit of Christ produces in some certain persons repentance and faith, and through faith and repentance the infallible application of his death: Therefore he merited these special benefits for those persons: Therefore he intended to merit them when he made himself a sacrifice on the cross. Nor is it lawful to think rashly or by chance, That Christ procured greater spiritual benefits for some than for others. What will our opponents say to this? Will they say that the Spirit of Christ bestows benefits on man which Christ hath not merited for them? They will not dare so to trample upon the merit of Christ. Will they reply, That faith and a good will, and the act of a beneficial application, are not the special gifts of the Holy Spirit? They will be ashamed of such gross Pelagianism. Let them, then, confess with us, That as through the death of Christ special benefits are procured for the elect, so there was in the will of Christ in dying, and of God the Father in accepting his death, an effectual intention of procuring and conferring them. And this is that singular privilege in the death of Christ which we claim for the elect alone; because it appears from the fact, that God has destined that they alone should be effectually saved by the death of his Son. From whence (Heb. vii. 25) he is stated to be the Saviour of some, that is, of the elect, altogether, viz. both meritoriously and efficaciously.
[BODY] <!--v2p537-539-->ARGUMENT 4. The commonly received distinction among all Divines, by which it is said, That Christ died for all sufficiently, but for the elect effectually, will afford us a fourth argument. For as from the former part of it we have refuted the opinion of those who deny that the death of Christ, according to the decree of God, is a remedy effectually and infallibly to be applied to the elect: for : what other sense can there be of these words, He died effectually for the elect, than, He died with an absolute intention and effectual will of saving theelect? Forif any one perverts this distinction, as if the sense were, That the death of Christ, which is sufficient for all, becomes eventually efficacious to some from the contingent act of the human will, in the first place, he is refuted by the words themselves; since when it is said, Christ died for such and such persons effectually, we denote a singular efficacy proceeding from the special will of him that died, not flowing from the contingent act of him that believes. Secondly, Such an eventual efficacy is not understood even by the Jesuits themselves in this distinction, but an efficacy specially intended and merited by him that died. Thus Suares says,* (In 3, disp. 41, p. 629) Christ hath not merited remission of sins for all men as to its efficacy, because he hath not applied his merit so that all men should infallibly obtain such an effect. Therefore, to merit effectually, or as to its efficacy, is to apply his merit to some persons with that intention, that they should infallibly obtain from it the effect of eternal life. He says a little more plainly, (p. 635) The merit of Christ equally regards all men as to its sufficiency, not as to its efficiency ; which is to be understood not only on account of the effect, which is produced in one and not in another, but also on account of the will, by which Christ himself offered his merits in a different way for different persons. Thirdly, all those testimonies of the Scriptures which set before us the death of Christ connected with the certain purpose of redeeming his sheep, gathering together the children of God, purchasing the church, cleansing and preserving a peculiar people, and others of that kind befarementioned, plainly shew that th's efficacy of which Divines speak, is to be entirely separated from the will of Christ in dying, and not to be sought from the contingent act of the human will. Christ, by some special application of his offering, obtained that it should be rendered effectual to the elect; but the elect did not render it effectual to themselves by any special apprehension flowing from their own free-will.
[BODY] <!--v2p539-540-->ARGUMENT 5. We shall take our fifth argument from the Divine predestination. Since, the predestination of certain persons before the foundation of the world being admitted, it is necessary to admit that in the will of Christ in offering himself there was some regard and respect to their salvation to be produced by the merit of his passion. For whether we place the Divine election(according to our mode of understanding it) before the decree of his suffering, or place it afterwards, yet it will always remain firm, that in the will of Christ, whether as about to suffer, or as suffering, there was some effectual and singular intention of effectually saving these persons, whether elected or to be elected. Since the will of Christ is never without conformity to that of his Father: Therefore it is incredible (as Suares hath rightly remarked, in 3. disp. 31, § 2, p. 635) that Christ did not otherwise offer his merits for those whom he knew to be elected by his Father than for others, since he saw that it was the will of the Father that they should be infallibly saved, and not the others ; and to his will he conformed himself in all things. To this also refer the words of the prophet before quoted (Isa. liii. 10,) The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Therefore, the election of some persons to eternal life, which proceeds from the gratuitous will of God, is put in execution through the merits of Christ, and therefore it is not to be doubted, that the meritorious death of Christ was specially and effectually destined by the Redeemer himself, and offered to the Father for the infallible redemption and salvation of these elect persons. Excellent is the observation of Scotus on this passage, (lib. 3, dist. 19, p. 74) Christ saw beforehand that his passion was to be offered to the Father for the predestinated and elect, and thus in reality he offered it effectually ; and the whole Trinity thus effectually accepted it on their behalf, and Jer no others was it effectually offered or accepted from etermity. By effectual offering and acceptance he means nothing more than that the offering and acceptance was joined with an absolute purpose of saving those for whom it was offered and accepted in this manner. Malderus, Bishop of Antwerp, relying on this argument, rejects the contrary opinion of those who think that Christ died for all equally as to the efficacy of his death, and concludes thus (page 137,)* Predestination being supposed, it follows, that Christ conferred by his death much more on these predestinated persons than on others.
[BODY] <!--v2p540-541-->ARGUMENT 6, Sixthly, we may argue from that proposition which is to be retained between the offering of Christ for men, and his prayer or intercession for them. That Christ prayed or interceded with his Father for the elect, that they might retain a firm and invincible faith to the last, and might effectually obtain salvation, may be collected from John xvii., and from his prayer offered for Peter by name, that his faith should not fail. And truly, he who should deny that the excellent gift of perseverance was obtained for particular persons by the special prayer of Christ, would refer the greatest of all spiritual benefits to the acceptance of free-will. This being admitted, I will add, As Christ specially prayed for special benefits to be conferred on the elect, so he specially offered up himself in order to merit the same benefits. Of this special prayer and oblation Suares says (in 3, disp. 41, p. 635,) As Christ prayed for men in a different way, so he merited differently ; on which account, although he is the universal Redeemer of all men, and a sufficient cause of salvation, yet in a special way he is the effectual cause of salvation to those whom he makes obedient to himself. Therefore the prayer which Christ specially and effectually put up for the elect, had its foundation in the oblation, in which he specially and effectually offered up himself for them. Observe the force of the argument; Whatever Christ obtains for individual persons by his special intercession, that he merited for them with the Father by the offering of himself which pertained to them especially: But by his intercession he obtains for the elect faith, perseverance, and salvation itself: Therefore he specially offered himself for them, that he might infallibly procure for them these benefits. I doubt not (says Vasques, in |, qu. 23, art. 5, disp. 94, cap. 3,) that Christ by his peculiar prayer and will applied his merits to those who were predestinated and elected.
[BODY] <!--v2p541-542-->ARGUMENT 7. The death and merit of Christ is the mean ordained by God for the execution and accomplishment of the eternal counsel of God concerning the salvation of men. If, therefore, the will of God shews itself differently in effecting the salvation of men, then also the death of Christ will be differently disposed by it in the salvation of men, and will be differently applied; since means are always used in order to the end, and the mode of application will be according to the intention of the agent. Now it is certain, and admitted by all sound Divines, That God does not will the salvation of all, in the same way as he wills the salvation of some: Therefore, neither hath he willed that the means by which he hath determined that the salvation of mankind is to be procured, namely, the death of Christ, should be so applied to all as tosome. Whence it follows, that the death of Christ was so destined for those to whom God hath determined salvation by his effectual will, that by the merit of it, all things necessary infallibly to produce salvation should redound to them from it. And, on the other hand, to those whom he hath not decreed salvation by such a will, neither was the death of Christ destined for them in the same manner. The death of Christ, therefore, according to the special intention of God the Father, who ordained this sacrifice for the salvation of men, and of Christ, who offered up himself in conformity to the will of the Father, is understood to have been destined and applied to the elect, whom God hath determined infallibly to save by his death, in a different way from its application to others, whom God permits, notwithstanding this death, to perish through their own fault. Whoever denies that the death of Christ was offered for men, and that it is applied to them with this difference, may by the same means deny that God, who is most wise and most powerful, either knows not how or cannot design and accommodate differently to various persons the means which were instituted by himself, as the different manner of his will demands.
[BODY] <!--v2p542-543-->ARGUMENT 8. Itiscertain from the event that some men apply to themselves the death of Christ, with its infi-. nite merit, really and effectually for salvation. I ask, then, whether this application is made according to the antecedent and effectual intention of Christ in offering himself on the cross, or contrary to it, or without any such preceding intention? If it should be granted, that Christ in dying had an antecedent and special will concerning the effectual application, which pertains to all the elect, and to them alone, this is the very thing we are endeavouring to prove, namely, that this death was destined, according : to the special intention of God and Christ, to be effectually applied to the elect. But no man would say, that any person can effectually apply this death to himself contrary to the intention of Christ. There is but one thing remaining, viz. We say that this effectual application is made by some men according to the freedom of their own will, without any special, preceding, absolute, and effectual intention of the will of God. But religion forbids us to assert this: First, because in good and saving actions the effectual will of God is antecedent to the effectual will of man, For it is God which worketh in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, (Philip. ii. 13) and he doth not work any thing in us antecedently which he hath not antecedently determined to work. ^ Secondly, because in those works which pertain to salvation we can do nothing without Christ, (John xv. 5,) Without me ye can do nothing. But what we can do through Christ, we receive the power of doing on account of the merit of Christ, which is not given to any man without the antecedent and special intention of Christ, who died and merited it. Therefore, whoever has obtained this most excellent benefit, that he should have the merit of Christ applied to himself effectually, ought to confess, that he has received the power of applying it more than others, from the special kindness of God and Christ, who intended, destined, and applied this his own merit especially to that person. Thus the event of the beneficial application of it in the predestinated, demonstrates that there was in Christ, who offered himself, and in God, who accepted this sacrifice, a special and effectual intention of its application to the predestinated. And this is that singular privilege of the elect in the death of Christ which we have endeavoured to establish by our proposition.
[BODY] <!--v2p543-544-->ARGUMENT 9, If it 1s asserted, that the death of Christ, according to the appointment of God and the intention of Christ, has not merited the effectual application and infallible attainment of salvation which flows from it to those who are predestinated, it will improperly follow, that the merit of the Mediator, according to the will and intention of the Father who accepted it, and of the Son who exhibited it, did not more regard those who are elected than those who are passed by, but pertains equally to both. The consequence is plain, because it is evident, That according to the will of God, the merit of Christ in dying extends itself to all men on this condition, If they should apply it to themselves by faith. Therefore, unless Christ had intended by his death to merit for the elect, in addition, that the beneficial application should be made to them by faith being given to them, no special privilege would be given to them in the merit of Christ. For the death of Christ, according to the appointment of God, merited this for Judas, that on the condition of faith he might attain to eternal life; but it obtained in addition for Peter, that on account of the merit of Christ he should receive persevering faith and all other spiritual benefits which are required in order infallibly to obtain eternal life. And to this the reasoning of the Apostle has respect (Rom. viii. 32,) where he discourses of the privileges of those who are predestinated, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? In which passage as he had before intimated some special calling of the predestined, which he named a calling according to purpose, so also he marks some special oblation of Christ for these predestinated persons, which may be called an oblation according to purpose, that is, with a certain purpose of conferring effectual grace on the elect, and infallibly leading them to life by the merit of this death. Those who take away this distinction in the design of God, as to the death of Christ, considered in relation to those who are elected and those who are passed by, as Bannes truly says (in 1, quest, 23, art. 5, p. 296, 297,) Declare that the merit of Christ is in no degree more perfect as a cause of salvation to the predestinate than to the reprobate. Because, as to the sufficiency of his merit, it equally regards all men ; but the difference is in this, that his merit is applied to some, but not to others. Therefore if the application as to the elect is not derived from the merit of Christ, his merit will have an equal regard to the predestinate and the reprobate.
[BODY] <!--v2p544-545-->ARGUMENT 10. If Christ did not offer himself to God the Father with some peculiar and absolute will of redeeming and effectually saving the elect by the merit of his death, then effectual grace and eternal life would not be otherwise prepared for or given to any persons in Christ than it was in Adam. For the possibility of having grace and eternal life on a condition depending upon our freewill, was granted to the human race through the first Adam. If, therefore, Christ did not by his death merit grace and life for any persons absolutely, but for all promiscuously, on this uncertain condition, If they should receive grace offered, and believe in him, and persevere in faith, and at the same time commits and leaves to the free-will of each whether he is willing to believe and to persevere or not, truly, as to the manner and uncertainty of obtaining effectual grace and eternal life, we should be in no better condition through Christ, than we were by Adam. But this is opposite to the holy Scripture, which suspends grace and eternal life, as prepared and given through Christ, to all who are to be saved, on the certain purpose of the good pleasure of God, and not on the contingent motion of the human will; which is shewn in the controversy concerning election and preterition. It is opposite also to the opinion of the orthodox Fathers, who opposed the Pelagians, and especially that of Augustine (de corrept. & grat. cap. 11,) where, when he had shewn what that grace was which was given in the first Adam, he speaks thus concerning the grace prepared and given through Christ to the predestinated : So much more help of grace ts given by Jesus Christ, to those to whom it hath pleased God to give it, that not only that 1s bestowed without which we cannot stand, even if we would, but also so much and such grace is bestowed, that we are willing. There is truly in us, through this grace of God, not only power to do what we will in receiving and perseveringly retaining the benefit, but also power to will what we are enabled to do. This grace, which is given for Christ's sake to the elect alone, and which produces in them alone the effect of a beneficial application and salvation, does not flow to them from any special operation of the human will, but from the special decree of the Divine will, through the medium of the merit of Christ. Therefore the merit of Christ was in some special way destined for them by God, and is applied to them by Christ himself.
[BODY] <!--v2p545-546-->ARGUMENT ll. That opinion is to be rejected by us which is either altogether the same, or at least is closely allied with the condemned opinion of the Pelagians: but the opinion of those who assert that the death of Christ, as to the Divine will and intention, is equally the same to all as to its efficacy, but that it arises from the human will that it is eventually effectual and beneficial to some, comes as nearas possible to Pelagius. But the orthodox having been stirred up to an accurate consideration of this thing by Pelagius, always taught, on the contrary, That a beneficial or effectual application of the merits of Christ depends on the grace of predestination, by which faith and, p od will is mercifully conferred upon some, though ‘dea hee others by the just judgment of God. As to Pelagius, that he transferred the benefit of the death of Christ, that is, eternal life, from the special intention of God, to the special operation of the human will, appears from the epistle of Prosper to Augustine. It appears also from the epistle of Hilary to Augustine, in which the Remnants of the Pelagians express their opinion that eternal life is so proposed and set before all men, through the death of Christ, that they altogether deny any singular or special purpose of God concerning the salvation of the elect through the death of Christ, and refer to the human will, the whole distinction between those who are saved through the death of Christ, and those who are not saved. But, on the other hand, that the orthodox acknowledged a special and secret purpose of God in accepting the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of Christ in offering it, concerning its effectual and beneficial application to certain persons, is not less evident from the books of Augustine, On the predestination of the saints, On the benefit of per-: severance, and others written against the Pelagians and Semipelagians ; in which this conclusion concerning the special will of God in saving the elect through Christ, is the primary, if not the only one. The same may be said of Prosper and Fulgentius, who every where refer the effectual obtaining of salvation to the effectual and special will of God in destining Christ in a special manner to the elect, and not to the free-will of men in applying the death and merits of Christ to themselves, as it may happen.
[BODY] <!--v2p546-547-->ARGUMENT 12. But lest we should seem to contend with empty names, our last argument is derived from the express testimonies of the Fathers, and of modern writers, who assign to the predestinated a special prerogative in the death of Christ ; which is nothing else than an infallible attainment of grace and glory, according to the special appointment of God, derived from the merit of Christ in dying and offering himself with a special regard for them. And first from St. Augustine :
[BODY] <!--v2p547-->Test. 1. This is an eminent testimony (in Johan. tract. 48, p. 352, tom. 9,) How did he say to them, Ye are not of my sheep? Because he saw that they were predestinated to eternal perdition, not purchased with the price of his blood to eternal life, A little after, Of those sheep, neither the wolf seizes, nor the thief steals, nor the robber kills any one. He who knows what he gave for them, is secure of every one of their number. From which words we collect two things : first, That our Saviour offered the price of his own blood in some special way for the redemption of the predestinated; in such a way indeed, as that from thence follows their infallible salvation. Secondly, That he did not offer his blood in the same way for those who were passed by, or not predestinated ; from whence they are denied £o have been purchased with the price of his blood in order to eternal life: which is to be understood of an absolute and effectual ordination to eternal life to be completed and brought into act by the death of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p547-->Test. 2. To this testimony another is allied (Serm. 50, de verbis Domini, p. 194, tom. 10,) The predestinated were not yet gathered together ; but he knew them who had predestinated them; he knew them who had come to redeem them with his own blood. He saw them, though they did not yet see him ; he knew them, though they did not yet believe in him. What is more plain, than that Christ came into the world, that he might redeem the predestinate with his own blood, and that he redeemed those who were effectually and infallibly to be brought to the participation of eternal life ; in which way he never determined with himself to redeem the nonelect.
[BODY] <!--v2p547-548-->Test. 9. The third testimony of the same Augustine, we shall produce from his book, (de natura & grat. cap. 5) which is as follows, Those who are delivered, are not called vessels of their own merits, but vessels of mercy. Of whose mercy but his, who sent Christ Jesus into this world to save sinners? whom he foreknew, and predestinated, and called, and justified. Asif he had said, That God, according to a special decree of mercy, sent Christ to deliver and save the predestinate effectually and infallibly ; in which sense they alone are called vessels of mercy.
[BODY] <!--v2p548-->It would be useless to produce more passages from Augustine, whose opinion of the absolute predestination of some to eternal life and of the eternal giving of them to Christ the Mediator, that they might be by him infallibly led to the same, is known to all who are conversant with his writings. What is meant by predestination, and giving and leading to eternal life, without this special design of applying his death and merits to them, can neither be understood nor imagined. See cap. 18, de prad. Sanct. cap. 7, de bono persev. cap. 9, de cor. & grat. —
[BODY] <!--v2p548-->Test. 4. The fourth testimony may be derived from Ambrose, whose words are these (lib. 6, cap. 7, Luke ;) Although Christ suffered for all, yet he suffered specially for us, because he suffered for his church: therefore tt is not to be doubted that much is due from him who hath received much. Here we see that, according to the opinion of Ambrose, Christ in suffering hada special regard to his church, from whence it followed that she received the special benefit of that passion of Christ. Therefore he asserts, that Christ suffered for all; but so that the will and intention of Christ in suffering does not equally regard all men, but is directed in some singular manner towards his mystical body, that is, the church of the first-born, which he willed to acquire for himself with his own blood and to unite to himself by his Spirit, in order to the infallible participation of eternal life. He did not suffer for all men with this special intention.
[BODY] <!--v2p548-549-->Test. 5. Remi, Bishop of Rheims, may follow Ambrose. He writes thus on Rom. viii, Whom he predestinated or before appointed to reign with him in eternal blessedness, those he called and justified by his passion, by baptism, and faith, adorned with good works, and justified unto the end of life. A little after, on these words, He who spared not his own Son, he says, that is, did not preserve him from death, but delivered him up for us all who were predestinated to eternal life.—Al these shew that Christ suffered for the elect and the elect alone, with a certain purpose of saving them; which is the special intention that we endeavour to establish, and which we contend is to be limited to the elect alone in this oblation of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p549-->Test. 6. Fulgentius says (De incarn. & grat. Jesu. Chr. cap. 29, p. 92, Biblioth. Patr. tom. 6,) Those who think that the will of God, by which he wills the salvation of all men, is equal towards the redeemed and the condemned ; when they are asked, why God wills that all men should be saved, and yet all are not saved, what will they answer? The learned Fulgentius intimates, that God of his special will hath determined that the salvation of those who are actually saved should be procured by Christ, and that those who affirm the contrary have nothing solid to answer when they are urged to shew from whence this distinction arises, that some are really saved by the death of Christ, and others are not saved. He demonstrates that this cannot be referred to the human will (cap. 30 and 31).
[BODY] <!--v2p549-->Test. 7. I add another testimony of the same Fulgentius, (lib. 5, de verit. Predest.) Those whom God hath predestinated to the adoption of sons, no Christian ought to doubt that these were not only predestinated tn Christ before the formation of the world, to the reward of glorification, but also to the grace of justification ; and by virtue of this predestination were called according to purpose and justified. He who does not doubt that the elect children of God were predestinated both to grace and glory before the formation of the world, will willingly confess, that the death and merit of Christ was ordained and accepted in some special way for these elect persons, that from thence they might infallibly obtain the grace and glory destined for them.
[BODY] <!--v2p549-550-->Test. 8. Paschasius* (Biblioth. Patr. tom. 9, p. 930) on the words Matt. i. 21, He shall save his people from their sins, writes thus, Hence Zacharias says, HE HATH RE- DEEMED HIS PEOPLE IN THE HOUSE OF HIS SERVANT David. Therefore those whom he foreknew to be his own, without doubt he came to save; all the rest he hath left by his secret Judgment in the mass of damnation. In these words he teaches that Christ came into the world and suffered death, with some special intention of saving the predestinate; but he had not the same special intention to effect the salvation of others, although he was willing to make salvation procurable by all on condition of faith.
[BODY] <!--v2p550-->Test. 9. Gregory the Great says (Moral, lib. 22, cap. 18, p. 132,) For the only begotten Son of God to intercede for man, is, with the co-eternal Father, the same as to demonstrate that he was man; and for him to have petitioned in behalf of human nature, is to have taken the same nature into the height — of his divinity. He intercedes, therefore, for us, not with words, but with compassion ; because what he was unwilling should be condemned in the elect, he delivered them from by undertaking tt. The last words are especially to be noticed, in which it is clearly indicated, that Christ in his whole mediatorial office had a special regard to the infallible deliverance of the elect.
[BODY] <!--v2p550-551-->Test. 10. Bernard on Psalm xci., He who dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High, vers. 9th, says, Christ died for his friends, that is, to acquire them; so that out of enemies he might make them friends. A little after, Thus, therefore, Christ died as to time for the ungodly, but as to predestination for his brethren and friends; which is the same as if he had said, That Christ in dying on the cross had a singular respect to the predestinate, his future brethren and friends.
[BODY] <!--v2p551-->But passing from the antients, let us descend to the Schoolmen and modern Popish writers, who, while they contend that Christ died for all, at the same time acknowledge that he died for the elect alone, with special intention of applying his death to them, in order to the infalhble attainment of eternal life.
[BODY] <!--v2p551-->Test. l. Let us begin with the Master of the Schoolmen, Peter Lombard: Christ offered himself on the cross for all men, as to the sufficiency of the price, but for the elect only as to its efficacy; because he brings salvation to the predestinate alone (lib. 3, dist. 20, lit. E.) The argument which he adjoins, why Christ is said to have died for the elect alone as to its efficacy, is most worthy of notice. For he does not say with the Pelagians and Arminians, that they alone were foreseen to be excited by grace to apply Christ to themselves, according to the freedom of their own will; but that he effected salvation in them alone through the benignity of his special mercy. Now what he has effected in the elect, without doubt he determined to effect in them. And this is that special intention according to which we profess that the death of Christ referred and was ordained for the elect alone.
[BODY] <!--v2p551-552-->Test. 2. Aquinas says, (part. 3, qu. 24, art. 4,) God fore-ordained our salvation, by predestinating from eternity that tt should be completed through Jesus Christ. Aquinas speaks of the elect, and asserts that God ordained, from eternity, that their salvation should be infallibly completed through Jesus Christ, I ask, then, how Christ exhibited himself as conformed to the eternal appointment of his Father, if, in his saving passion, he had not applied his merits in a peculiar manner infallibly to effect and complete the salvation of the elect? Itis granted, then, that the special intention of God in accepting this sacrifice, and of Christ in offering himself, was limited to the elect alone, as far as the passion of Christ is joined with the infallible effect of salvation as to individuals.
[BODY] <!--v2p552-->Test.,3, Aquinas also observes (Quest. disp. de grat. Christi. art. 7, resp. ad 4,) The merit of Christ as to its suf- Jictency equally regards all men, but not as to its efficacy ; which arises partly from free-will, partly from the election of God, through which the effect of the merits of Christ is mercifully conferred upon some, but is by his just judgment withdrawn from others. What Aquinas says, that it arises partly from free-will, that the merits of Christ as to their efficacy do not equally regard all men, is to be understood with respect to those who are lost, who, of their own freewill turn themselves away from the fountain of salvation: but what he says, that this inequality arises partly from the election of God, is to be understood with respect to those who are saved, who, because God, according to the good pleasure of his election, has special compassion on them, receive from the fountain of salvation whatever is necessary to effect their salvation. That this was the sentiment of Aquinas appears from his answer to the last argument, where he says, That this is conferred freely upon men by God, that they obtain the efficacy of the merit of Christ. If the effect of the merits of Christ is mercifully conferred on some certain persons by the election of God, and is at the same time denied to others, who can doubt that Christ, being most conscious of the election of God and of his calling, offered himself and his merits specially for these persons, and to the price of his death, which was most sufficient in itself, added moreover the most effectual and special intention of his will, in order to effect the salvation of these elect persons? To this those words refer (John x. 15,) 1 lay down my life for the sheep, namely, with some special intention of effectually redeeming and delivering them, and leading them to life eternal; as may be collected from the whole discourse of our Saviour at that time.
[BODY] <!--v2p552-553-->Test. 4. Scotus (in 3 Sentent. dist. 19, quest. 1) has many things which greatly conduce to the illustration of our opinion; this especially: As the Word foresaw that his passion would be offered to the Father for the elect, so he offered it effectually in the event, and the whole Trinity effectually accepted his passion for them; and for no others was it effectually offered, nor from eternity accepted. Scotus acknowledges, that, according to the eternal decree of the whole Trinity, the passion of Christ was offered and accepted in some singular way, and with some special intention for the elect.
[BODY] <!--v2p553-->Test. 5. Hugo de St. Victor (de Sacr. fid. lib. 1, part. 8, cap. 7, where he has a treatise on the passion of Christ) writes thus: Human nature was corrupted by sin, and altogether under the sentence of condemnation through sin; and therefore if all had been condemned, there would have been no injustice. But grace came, and chose some out of the mass of mankind through mercy to salvation, and left others through justice in condemnation. Hugo plainly teaches that Christ in coming into the world and offering himself for the sins of the human race, had a special regard to the elect, whom he chose from the mass of mankind; and whom, according to the eternal good pleasure of God, he determined to bring to salvation through the merits of his death, and does always actually bring them to it.
[BODY] <!--v2p553-554-->Test. 6. Cajetan, in explaining Rom. viii. 32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? writes thus, Paul had perceived that the aforesaid argument of so many gifts did not effectually infer that God worked ALL THINGS to the elect for good; but that God worked for good to them; and therefore that he might effectually conclude that it was with respect to ALL THINGS, he added, that God had freely given even his Son for the elect, that thence he might infer that all things were given with the Son to the elect. These words of Cajetan cannot be accommodated to that universal giving of Christ, by which it is understood that he was equally given for the whole world: for this being granted, God would equally give all things to all men; which is evidently false. Therefore some special giving must necessarily be admitted, according to which Christ may be understood to be given for the elect alone, and which alone brings with it an infallible and certain giving of all things necessary to salvation.
[BODY] <!--v2p554-->Test. 7. Stapleton, (Promptuar. moral. Dominic. 2, post. Pasch. p. 254) observes, Christ in dying died effectually indeed for his friends alone, and for those who would become his friends after the conversion of each of them, not for those who were his friends before. This Papist does not fear to acknowledge a special intention of Christ in dying as to the elect. For these were to be his friends after their conversion, for the effectual redemption of whom Christ laid down his life, when, together with others, they were . ungodly enemies, sinners, dead in sins. He is said indeed to have died for all men, as to the sufficiency of his death; but for his sheep or his elect, as to its efficacy; that' is, with the special intention of giving to them, through the merit of his death, that effectual grace by which they should believe and be saved.
[BODY] <!--v2p554-->Test. 8. Estius, on the words (Titus ii. 14) Who gave himself for us, says, that is, who having assumed our flesh delivered up himself, whether for all men, or especially for the elect, in whose person Paul often speaks. For the price of the death of Christ is sufficient indeed for the redemption of all men, but it is applied for salvation to the elect alone. Estius here intimates two things ; first, That the oblation of Christ had a general regard to all men, but a special one to the elect; secondly, That the special regard ought to consist in this, that 1t should be joined with a certain intention of applying it. For he does not say, The elect alone apply this death of Christ to themselves for salvation through the strength of their free-will; but, It is applied to these alone for salvation; truly, by the special favour of God in choosing them and intending this great benefit for his elect through the death of Christ.
[BODY] <!--v2p554-556-->Test. 9. I come now to the Jesuits, who although they defend universal grace and universal redemption, yet dare not deny the special and effectual appointment and intention of this saving passion as to the elect. Let two of the most eminent, Suares and Vasques,* speak for the rest. Suares (in 3 Aquin. qu. 19, disp. p. 635, 41) remarks, As Christ prayed for men in a different manner ; so he merited in a different manner, for some sufficiently, for others effectually. On which account, although he is the universal Redeemer of all, and a sufficient cause of salvation, yet he is in a special way the effectual cause of salvation to those whom he makes obedient to himself. For it cannot be supposed, that Christ did not otherwise offer his merits for those whom he knew to be elected by the Father, than for others, when he saw that it was the will of the Father that these should be infallibly saved, and not the others. Suares here allows, that the death and merits of Christ are effectual to the salvation of the elect on account of the special mode of the oblation, and the will of the Offerer; not on account of the causal or contingent act of the human will in apprehending it. Test. 10. Vasques (in 1 Aquin. qu. 23, disp. 49, cap. 3, p. 687) clearly acknowledges this special intention of Christ as to the elect in the application of his merits. I doubt not that Christ by his peculiar prayer and will applied his merits to those who were predestinated and elected. Avain, (in 3 Aquin. qu. 19, disp. 77, cap. 5, p. 384) he produces Andreas Vegast asserting, That the merits of Christ did not profit all men effectually, because Christ did not pray, nor offer his passion for those whom they do not profit, We have then, not only the antient Fathers, but even the modern Papists, confessing what we are endeavouring to demonstrate, namely, That the death of Christ was so constituted by God to be an universal cause of salvation apphicable to all men, that at the same time, through some special intention of him who offered and him who accepted it, it is constituted a particular cause of salvation to be infallibly and especially applied to all the elect, and to them alone. See also Malderi Anti Synod, p. 138.
[BODY] <!--v2p556-559-->Test. ll. Lastly, our own Divines, who do not deny that Christ suffered for all, yet at the same time profess that he redeemed the elect by his death in some peculiar manner. Bucer expresses his opinion on these words, (Matt. 1. 21) He shall save his people, that is, the elect, whom’ the Father brings to him. By his death he expiated the sins of all the elect, and merited that the Father being propitious to them should give them his Spirit. Here observe that Christ by his death merited something for the elect, which he did not merit for others: But what Christ merited for any one, he merited according to the appointment and acceptance of his Father: Therefore, according to the will and appointment of the Father, the death of Christ pertains to the elect in some special way, in which it is not extended to others. Musculus, who in his Common-places strongly urges, that Christ is to be esteemed an universal Redeemer, yet acknowledges a special intention of Christ concerning the redemption of the elect, (on Rom. 8) where he says, That Christ came into this world for the sake of the elect. Which cannot be otherwise understood than that he came into the world with a peculiar intention of infallibly saving the elect. Which special intention of obtaining for the elect the benefit of his passion to be applied to them, is so far peculiar to them, that it is not extended to others. Calvin, on Heb. ii. 13, at the words, Behold, I and the children which God hath given me, says, Christ brings none to the Father, but those whom He hath given him. But we know that this giving depends on eternal election ; because those whom the Father hath destined to life, he delivers into the custody of the Son, that he may preserve them in safety. Three things are here to be observed; first, That God the Father hath specially destined some to life by the decree of election : secondly, That Christ the Mediator hath received these elect persons as peculiarly commended to him by the Father: thirdly, 'That Christ takes special care of these elect persons, and so defends and governs them in this life, that at length he may lead them to life eternal. Which things being granted, he would be destitute both of reason and religion who should deny that Christ, in the work of his oblation and of human redemption, intended the salvation of these persons with a peculiar, that is, with an absolute and effectual will. Zanchius (in Miscell. tract. de pred. Sanct. p. 14) observes, Jt is not false that Christ died for all men: for the passion of Christ is offered to all in the Gospel. But he died effectually for the elect alone, because indeed they only are made partakers of the efficacy of the passion of Christ. But that they only are made partakers effectually of this passion, is to be referred to the special and effectual will of Christ in suffering, and of God the Father in accepting this sacrifice in a peculiar way for the elect more than for others: for in the participation of saving good, the will of God precedes the human will. Lastly, that 1 may not be tedious in bringing together many authors, Vorstius* himself could not deny that the redemption completed on the cross pertains in some peculiar way to the elect. For thus he speaks (in Arnica duplic. p. 230) l¢ appears that the word redemption may be applied in a different. sense to many species of the same genus ; and therefore it may be properly said, that some only, and not all, were redeemed in some special way or peculiar sense, and so it is usually said iu the holy Scripdures. Again (page 235,) answering a passage produced from Heb. xiii. 20, in which Christ is called The great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, he grants, that Christ is the Shepherd of these sheep, and indeed of these only, in a peculiar way, namely, as to the saving and spiritual act of feeding them, which contains the actual gift of the Holy Spirit ; and also as to some special ac- ' quisition of these sheep. Y ask, what this is which Vorstius concedes to us, when he grants, that not all, but some, were redeemed by the death of Christ in a special way and peculiar sense? and when he says, that Christ is the Shepherd of his sheep in a peculiar manner, as to some special acquisition of them? If he means nothing more than that in the event the benefit of redemption pertains to some, that is, to those that believe, in a special and peculiar way, according to the different acts of the human will, he merely trifles, and does not at all answer the testimonies brought against him. Forall those passages, He purchased the church with his own blood: he is the Saviour of the body ; he laid down his life for the sheep: he died that he might gather together in one the children of God: these, and such like texts, do not point out any special works of the Church, the body, or the sheep; but the special intention and operation of the Husband, the Head, the Shepherd, respecting this Church, this body, these sheep, by his special will determining and procuring their salvation by the virtue and merit of his death.
[BODY] <!--v2p559-->Against all these things which we have discussed respecting the special intention of Christ in dying being referred and restricted to the elect, and concerning the saving application of the death of Christ depending upon and flowing from that intention, it may be urged by way of
[BODY] <!--v2p559-560-->Objection, l. If itis granted that in the oblation of Christ there was such an intention limited to the elect, so as that an effectual application and infallible salvation is obtained for them, then we seem to refer their justification and salvation not so much to the good pleasure and special mercy of God, as to some kind of justice. For if it should be inquired, why Peter rather than Judas received effectual grace and salvation from the merit of the death of Christ? it will be answered, according to our opinion, Because Christ, by his special intention, and by the application of his merits, merited that for Peter which he did not merit for Judas. But that which is given, from the merits of Christ being peculiarly applied to any person, does not seem to be given merely from the mercy of the good pleasure of God, but rather from justice : because 1t 1s just that what Christ hath merited for these or those persons, should be specially assigned to them. But this seems to contradict the Apostle, who derives grace, and the infallible salvation of the predestinate, from the mere favour of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p560-->Reply. There is no opposition between these two opinions, God justifies and saves Peter of pure grace, or of his own mere good pleasure, and, God justifies and saves Peter in consideration of the merits of Christ being specially ordained and accepted for the salvation of Peter. The reason of this is plain, Because God, who, of his own mere good pleasure and pure mercy, determined to give faith and salvation to Peter, determined at the same time not to give to him these things otherwise than through and on account of the merits of Christ, destined for and given to Peter. in some singular way, and that from the same good pleasure and pure mercy. This good pleasure of God is opposed to our merits, and is accomplished, not made void by the merits of Christ being applied to us. From whence the Apostle (Heb. xiii. 21) says, that God works in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Therefore, although it is of the mere good pleasure of God, that he is willing to grant to Peter effectual grace and salvation, yet this good pleasure is not accomplished otherwise than through the merits of Christ. "This, then, is the sum of our reply ; Although every work of special grace which is done in the elect is done on account of the merits of Christ being specially applied to them, yet in their justification and salvation is seen the true way of mercy, and not of justice; because Christ with his merits, with this very mode of meriting and offering his merits, some special regard being had to the elect, the whole of this, I say, derives its origin from the gratuitous good will of God towards them.
[BODY] <!--v2p560-561-->OBJECTION 2. If we admit that the elect obtain effectual grace or saving faith because the death and merit of Christ in suffering on the cross was applied to them by some special intention, then we seem to admit that the merits of the passion of Christ were imputed or applied to some men before they believed. But this is contrary to the received opinion of Divines, which asserts that faith is an instrument or medium, without which the merits of the passion of Christ are not applied to individuals. It is necessary, therefore, that this act of faith should exist, which may have the merits of Christ specially applied or imputed toit. How, then, can this special application of the merits of Christ to the elect, who are not yet made faithful and believing, be applied ?
[BODY] <!--v2p561-562-->Reply. Inorder to meet this objection, let us make the words of the Apostle (Eph. i. 3) the foundation of our remarks, God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, that is, whatever saving good comes to us from God, is given to us through Christ and for the sake of his merits. Therefore, since saving faith itself, which is peculiar to the elect, is to be placed among the chief spiritual blessings, it ought to be granted, that it is given on account of the merits of Christ, to all those to whom it is actually given. Therefore, what Divines commonly say, that faith is the instrument, by means of which the merits of Christ are applied to us, is to be understood of its application, as it is considered on the part of men: For the elect cannot apply to themselves the merits of Christ in order to the reception of any spiritual benefits whatever, unless through faith being first supposed to be in them. But if we consider the application or imputation on the part of God alone, then we say, That God both can and does apply, that is, impute and communicate to men the merits of Christ, so that, from regard to those merits, he gives to them spiritual good things, even when they are reckoned impious and unbelieving. For faith, when it is first given, is not given to a believer, but to an unbeliever; but it is given to the elect on account of the merits of the Mediator. Therefore we must necessarily confess, that none of the elect can, by believing, apply to themselves the merits of Christ in order to the fruition of eternal life, unless God of his special mercy should, on account of the merits of Christ, first give them faith whereby they may believe. And this is that special application of the merits of Christ, which we affirm pertains to the elect by some peculiar privilege, from the special will of Christ in offering himself, and of God the Father in accepting this sacrifice. Scotus had respect to this in his saying, which is most worthy of observation, That this was the principal thing in the merit of Christ, that he merited that those should be united to him who had not been so before (lib. 3, dist. 19, qu. 1, p. 75). Which is the same as if he had said, that the chief efficacy of the merits of Christ consisted in this, that he merited, that some of those who believed not should actually become believers, and, being united to Christ by faith, should obtain eternal life. This is that special ordination and application of the merits of ' Christ, which altogether depends on the good pleasure of God, and not on the free-will of men.
[BODY] <!--v2p562-->OBJECTION 3. If in Christ's offering himself, and God's accepting that sacrifice, there was some special intention of quickening and infallibly saving all the elect, by the virtue and merit of this sacrifice, we seem to exclude from this special privilege the elect under the Old Testament, who were born and died before this sacrifice of Christ was made on the cross.
[BODY] <!--v2p562-563-->Reply. As to the argument of general sufficiency or special efficacy, I answer, That the sacrifice of Christ had the same virtue under the Old Testament, before the external act of its exhibition, asit had and has under the New Testament, after Christ was really exhibited and offered on the cross. For as, from the special intention of God, special grace is derived to the elect under the New Testament, on account of the merit of this sacrifice now actually offered ; so, from the special will of the same God, special grace flowed to the elect under the Old Testament on account of the merit of the sacrifice afterwards to be offered. For Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world both in the preparation of his own will, and in the acceptance of the will of the Father. It is, therefore, here to be observed, that there is one kind of cause which operates physically, or naturally, another which operates meritoriously, or morally. A cause which acts physically, must necessarily be brought into action, before any effect can be produced by virtue of it: but a cause which acts meritoriously, or morally, such as is the passion of Christ, may produce its effect before it actually exists, unless it precedes, at least in his knowledge and acceptance to whom it refers, by regard to him, to dispense the benefits of his grace to men. For in this thing a meritorious cause has some connexion with a final cause, which, though not yet actually existing. but being only foreseen and previously considered, very much moves the agent in doing this or that. In this manner we say that the passion of Christ, and his merits depending upon it, having been foreseen as offered to God, and to be specially applied to Jacob, and not to Esau, were a kind of moving cause to God to give to Jacob that special grace which he denied to Esau. Suares rightly says, (in 3, qu. 49, art. 4, in Comm.) That special love by which, on account of the merits of. Christ either given or foreseen, God sanctifies and reconciles men to himself, may be included in the merits of Christ, either by his meriting for us the effect of that love, or the love (or election) of God freely bestowed upon us.
[BODY] <!--v2p563-->OBJECTION 4. Lastly, it may be objected, That it is ! not consistent, or rather it is altogether incongruous, tliat God, who willed that the death of Christ, with the rich treasure of his merits included in it, should be equally. applicable to all men for the obtaining of eternal life, on condition of faith, was, at the same time, unwilling to prepare and give this faith, on account of the same merits of Christ, equally to all; but should give persevering and saving faith to the elect alone, and that on account of the merits of Christ being limited to and ordained for them by some special will and regard of God.
[BODY] <!--v2p563-565-->Rerrv. I answer, where any Divine act appears, it is rash, I will not say impious, to doubt of its equity or coneruity. But we have already demonstrated, that now, by the death of Christ, a covenant was established with the human race, according to the tenor of which, eternal life is promised to every man on condition of faith. Of this covenant Rupert observes, (in 4, Gen. cap. 34) We say that that covenant, by which alone the enmities were removed which had subsisted between God and men, was many times indeed promised, but once executed, namely, by the passion of Christ the Son of God. For in this, without any contradiction, is a certain foundation of peace, while God, accepting the faith of men, gives to them Christ his Son, that they may be saved by him. Therefore no doubt is to be entertained of this appointment of God, founded on the death and merits of Christ, and having respect to all men individually. But it is still questionable, whether, granting this universal covenant of giving eternal life to all men, if they should believe, God exercises his liberty, and. exhibits his special mercy, in giving to the elect that saving faith by which they may believe, and that through Christ, and on account of his merits, applied to them by some peculiar privilege. The thing speaks for itself. For we see that the elect, and the elect alone, eventually obtain from God persevering and saving faith. But suppose that so great a gift were specially given to them in any other way or respect, than on account of the merits of Christ, ordained and applied to them by some special intention of God ; it is altogether unlawful to suppose it. For as Ambrose excellently says on Eph. i. 2, (He hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ), Every gift of grace is through Christ. These things being settled, although (as I said) it is useless to dispute of the congruity of Divine actions where there is evidence of the facts themselves, yet, that no scruple may be left, we say, first, That this special intention of God, according to which he determined with himself, on account of the merits of Christ, to give to the elect the special benefits of effectual grace and salvation, does not clash with that conditional compact, Whosoever believeth shall be saved, but is rather a kind of special design subordinate to the infallible fulfilment of this universal compact. For those who trust to their own free-will, with some little helps of grace, repel or oppose faith. Lest, therefore, this universal compact should not bring the effect of salvation to any one, God, by a special and secret intention, hath taken care that the merit of the death of Christ should be applied to some for the infallible obtaining of faith and eternal life. Secondly, we say, That it is not unjust or incongruous, that this special intention of an effectual application of the merits of Christ should exhibit its efficacy in some, and not in all men; because, since the death of Christ is a free gift of God bestowed on the human race, the free distribution and application of merits arising from it, ought by all means to depend on the mere will of God. Thirdly, we add, That God, who in the Gospel has promised eternal life to all men individually, on account of the merits of Christ, if they believe, yet has not promised to any unbeliever, that he would give to him, on account of the merits of Christ, infallibly and perseveringly to believe. I ask, then, Where is this inconsistency to be found? Not with respect to those who believe and are saved; for it is not culpable injustice to give, on account of the merits of Christ, to individual persons what was not promised to them individually, but it is laudable goodness to do this. Not with respect to those who believe not, and perish; for it is not unjust in itself, nor can it be judged to be inconsistent with the supreme goodness of God, to deny that benefit to any one, which it appears is not in any way due to him.
[BODY] <!--v2p565-567-->Therefore, let this be the sum and conclusion of this whole controversy on the death of Christ; That Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and man, in confirming the evangelical covenant, according to the tenor of which eternal life is due to every one that believeth, made no division or separation of men, so that we can say that any one is excluded from the benefit of his death, if he should believe. And in this sense we contend, in agreement with the Scriptures, the fathers, and solid arguments, that Christ suffered on the cross and died for all men, or for the whole human race. We add, moreover, that this Mediator, when he had determined to lay down his life for sin, had also this special intention, that, by virtue of his merits, he would effectually and infallibly quicken and bring to eternal life, some persons who were specially given to him by the Father. And in this sense we contend that Christ laid down his life for the elect alone, or in order to purchase his Church; that is, that he died for them alone, with the special and certain purpose of effectually regenerating and saving them by the merit of his death. Therefore, although the merit of Christ equally regards all men as to its sufficiency, yet it does not as to its efficacy : which is to be understood, not only on account of the effect produced in one and not in another, but also on account of the will, with which Christ himself merited, and offered his merits, in a different way for different persons. Now, the first cause and source of this diversity, was the election and will of God, to which the human will of Christ conformed itself. And from hence : Suares rightly deduces, That this merit of Christ is the very cause of spiritual regeneration, and gives it efficacy, and produces its effect, and at the same time is the cause why that man is reg. nerated, on account of whom he specially offered his merit (in 3, qu. 19, disp. 41, § 2, p. 635.) For our Divines, let that eminently learned man of pious memory, Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, speak. Thus he says, (in Thomson Diatr. p. 94) Although we do not deny that Christ died for all men, yet we believe that he died specially and peculiarly for the Church, nor does the benefit of redemption pertain tn an equal degree to all. And from the peculiarity of this benefit, and from the human will, in some degree depends the efficacy of all means, that they are for those only, and for their use, whom Christ redeemed with some peculiar regard to their being elected in him. Nor do they obtain the effect, because of being willing, but because God, according to the purpose of his own grace, works in the elect and redeemed to will that to which he chooses them. Therefore, He, who by his death merited eternal life sufficiently for all n.en, so as that it is to be given to all, according to the evangelical covenant, if they believe, also merited most effectually for some, by the peculiar application of his merits, that they should believe, and that they should receive eternal life from the gratuitous gift of God, through and on account of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is the peculiar lot of the elect: Of which may the Father of Mercies make us all partakers! To whom, with the Son, and the Holy Spirit, be honour, praise, and glory now and for ever. Amen.
[END] END OF THE DISSERTATION.
[FN] <!--v2p328--> * Primasius, a Catholic Bishop of the 6th Century, a native of Africa, who obtained the See of Adrumetum, also known by the name of Justinianopolis, in the Province of Byzacene. About the year 550, he was one of a deputation which was sent to Constantinople on the affairs of the African Churches, and he was at that city in 553, when the fifth General Council assembled there by order of the Emperor Justinian. He refused, however, to take any share in the deliberations of that assembly, though repeatedly invited ; and he subscribed to the Constitution which Pope Vigilius issued in defence of the Three Chapters, i. e. the three pieces in the writings of Theodorus of Mopsuestia, on the subject of the human and divine natures in Christ. Primasius was looked upon as a Commentator on Scripture and a writer of some note in that age; aud his Commentary upon the Epistles of Paul, as also a book of his concerning Heresies, are yet extant; but the former Mosheim regards as nothing more than a compilation from the works of Augustine, Jerome, Ambrose, and others. Mosheim's view of the writers of this period is worthy of the perusal of any one who desires to be informed in what sense the Church should be regarded as the infallible judge of Scripture. He would also do well to peruse Bower's Life of Pope Vigilius, and the account given under it of the occurrences and men of this period, in order to judge of the claims of the Papal Church to Apostolical Succession and Unity.
[FN] <!--v2p329--> * Ex objectionibus Vincentianis, the followers of Vincentius Lirinensis, or St. Vincent of Lerins. He was by birth a Gaul, and a cotemporary with Augustine, entering the Monastery in the Island of Lerins from the storms of a military life, about the middle of the fifth Century; and, from the place of his retirement and great sanctity, becoming known as above described. In his retreat he composed a treatise entitled Commonitorium adversus Heereticos, in which he undertook to shew the folly of all novel opinions, His production obtained celebrity, and was often reprinted in the 16th and 17th Centuries. An English Translation of it by the Rev. William Reeves, was published in 1709, together with translations of the early Christian Apologists, in 2 vols. 8vo. ; the wholeis preceded by an able ** Dissertation" of above 100 pages, in correction of Daille's work, ** upon the right use of the Fathers.” It has been supposed that Vincentius himself was opposed to Augustine, and put forth 16 propositions as erroneous, which he charged upon Augustine and his scholars : but there is no evidence of this. ‘The work here mentioned seems to have been the only production of his pen ; and the object of it is to shew, that men should prove the orthodoxy of their faith, first, by the authority of Holy Scripture, and secondly, by the doctrine of the Catholic Church. Reeves's translation of Vincentius’s treatise appears to have been undertaken primarily to prove, that Vincentius was no Pelagian, and that his work was not directed against Augustine's views as had been as- : serted ; and secondarily, that it made nothing for the Roman Catholics, who boasted of his being a Champion for their favourite buttress of Tradition: And it is manifest the work was directed against the heresies of Photinus, Apollinaris, Pelagius, Nestorius, the Manichszans, and such like: that he has collected the Rules which the most orthodox Fathers had laid down as derived from Scripture, to judge of such novelties as these heresiarchs broached, and even citing some of St. Augustine’s rules, triumphantly supporting the whole by Scriptural examples and testimonies—by patriarchal and apostolic authority. As to Vincentius’s upholding the authority of the Romish Church, or sustaining the popish dogma of Tradition, his Translator has justly observed in his * Preliminary Discourse" to the treatise, * had Vincentius been assisted with a prophetic vision of the future cor- * yuptions in the Church of Rome, he could not have expressed himself * more clearly against it. ‘The whole design and bent of his book is di- “ rectly against all innovations in the Faith, and for cleaving inviolably to * the Creed as then explained, and always understood by the Apostolic ** Churches.”—It is indeed a wise and judicious production, and highly de.
[FN] <!--v2p330--> serving the attention of the serious student in the present day. The closing remarks of the preceding Note may be well applied here, and this treatise recommended to every reader who would be guarded against the tares of novelty and heresy, which the enemy of souls is causing to spring and grow again in this age. It is incumbent upon every one to revise the history of the true Church and of real Religion, and to examine the writings themselves of fathers and divines which are now often appealed to, that by the aid of information and experience obtained from them, and by discovering the falsification or perversion of the same, each one, under the signs and amid the perplexity of conflicting opinions in our times, and the prospects which seem to threaten us, may know what to do. 1 Chron. xii. 32.
[FN] <!--v2p330--> * CaprTULA GaLLorumM, or Objections of the Gallican Divines. These were chiefly the priests of Marseilles, about whose series of objections (which probably were those attributed to Vincentius) Prosper wrote to Augus- _ tine, propounding those objections, and praying him to answer them. This letter is among Augustine's Epistles, and his reply to it in his Books of the Saints’ Predestination and of the Gift of Perseverance, proved so satisfactory to Prosper's mind, that he became the zealous defender of Augustine against those who attacked his opinions.
[FN] <!--v2p330--> + ‘The objections started by others must certainly be here intended; perhaps those Monks who stole a portion of the Manuscript of Vincentius’s treatise, and under cover of the signature he had adopted, Peregrinus, perverling his views and carrying them to a point he never intended—like the
[FN] <!--v2p331--> Papists of more modern times—broached their quibbles against Augustine, or rather their distortions of hissentiments. Vide Reeves's Translation and Notes, and Cave's Historia Literaria.
[FN] <!--v2p331--> * 'This Synod, or Council, as it is termed by Du Pin, was held in the year 855, by the management of Remi, Bishop of Lyons, in order to confirm his opinions about Grace. It was composed of 14 Bishops of the Provinces of Lyons, Arles, and Vienne, in which the three Metropolitans presided, and Ebbo, Bishop of Grenoble, was present. ‘hey made 6 Canons in this Synod concerning Grace, Free-will, and Predestination. They rejected four Canons made at the preceding Council of Quiercy, held under Hinemar, Archbishop of Rheims, on the doctrine of Predestination, as idle, vain, and false ; and condemned a Treatise of Scotus on the same subject, asa silly book. Hincmar afterwards wrote a treatise of thirty-eight — Chapters, which he dedicated to Charles the Bald, to defend his four Articles, and confute the Canons of the Council of Valence. In this treatise he sets out with a view of the origin of the heresy about Predestination, and to prove that it commenced after the time of Augustine. Thus much for the boasted Unity of the Church of Rome at this period.
[FN] <!--v2p333--> : * GnEVINCHOVIUS, a Dutchman who flourished in the beginning of the 17th Century as a Pastor of Rotterdam, and was eminent among the Re. monstrants. Weismanni Hist. Eccl. ed. 1745, Part. Post. p. 1158. He is largely noticed in Brandt's Reformation in the Low Countries, Vol. iii. p. 175.
[FN] <!--v2p333--> + Dr. WirLraw Ames, born of an antient Norfolk Family in 1576, and educated at Cambridge under the celebrated William Perkins, fled from the persecution of Archbishop Bancroft, and was invited by theStates of Frieseland to the Divinity Chair iu the University of Francker, which he filled with great reputation during the space of twelve years, after which he removed to Rotterdam, at the invitation of an English Church there, and became their pastor. He was at the Synod of Dort, and informed King James's Ambassador at the Hague, from time to time, of the debates of that assembly. Besides his controversial writings against the Arminians, he published the following : —Medulla 'T'heologize ; —Manuductio Logica;— Cases of Conscience ;—Analysis on the Book of Psalms ;—Notes on the first and second Epistles of St. Peter, &c.——Maclaine in Mosheim.
[FN] <!--v2p334--> * Faustus, a learned prelate, was a native of Britain, first became a Monk of the Monastery of Levins, then Abbot of the same, and in 455 was chosen Bishop of Riez, or Ries, in Provence. He wrote against the doctrines of election and reprobation, which pieces have been abridged by Du Pin. His character is drawn by Milner as opposite to the view here given of it, as Milner's representation of Pope Gregory the Great is to the views and testimonies of other historians and writers. Faustus was banished from his See in 481, and diedsoon after. "Vide Cave, Hist. Lit. vol. i. p. 453. A.D. 472 ; and Du Pin, Eccl. Hist. Cent. 5. vol. iv.
[FN] <!--v2p340--> * Leontius, Bishop of Arles, according to Du Pin.
[FN] <!--v2p342--> * YrLopoamp, or F'rodoard, an Ecclesiastical Historian of this period, being first Keeper of the Archives in the Cathedral, and afterwards Abbot of the Monastery at Rheims, in the former part of the 9th Century, and publishing a history of the Church of Rheims from its foundation to 248, and a Chronicle of his times, much estecmed by the learned.
[FN] <!--v2p343--> * This Synod was assembled in the year 848, by Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mentz. Mosheim’s account of the circumstances that fol. lowed, as aflecting Godeschaleus, is highly interesting.
[FN] <!--v2p346--> * BurrrsoER (Henry), a native of Bremgarten, in the Canton of Zurich, born 1504. When only twelve years old he was sent to school at Emeric, with little more provision than the clothes upon his back, and for
[FN] <!--v2p347--> three years supported himself by singing in the streets. He then removed to Cologne, where, applying closely to literature, and becoming acquainted with the works of Melancthon, he adopted the opinions of the Reformers, and having abandoned the Romish church, connected himself closely with Zuingle, accompanying him to Berne, to the disputations held there in 1528. His friend falling in the battle fought between the Catholic and Protestant Cantons, on the llth of October, 1531, Bullinger sueceeded him as pastor of Zurich, where he had taken refuge, and while in this capacity, defended in 1545 the tenets of his brethren against the censures of Luther, resisting at the same time the attempts of Bucer to bring about a compromise between the two sects respecting the eucharist. He also distinguished himself by the effectual resistance which he made against the proposed treaty, by which a number of Swiss mercenaries were to be taken into the service of France, on the ground that it was inconsistent with Christianity for any one to let himself out for the purpose of killing those who had never injured him. He died at Zurich in 1575, leaving behind him ten volumes of printed controversial treatises, with several manuscript pieces. It is a singular proof of the opinions of the early Reformers respecting the celibacy of the Clergy, that at the age of sixty, with eleven children, Bullinger thought it necessary to publish an apology for continuing a widower.— Bayle. Strype’s Annals.
[FN] <!--v2p347--> * AnETIUS (Benedict) an Ecclesiastic of Berne, in Switzerland, eminent as a botanist and theologian. In the former science he published an account of Alpine plants, which is highly spoken of. In Divinity, on which he gave lectures at Marpurg, his works are—A Commentary on the New Testament, and Examen Theologicum, in folio, which it is said was printed twelve times in three years. He died in 1574.
[FN] <!--v2p347--> + Vide page 214 of this Vol. Note +.
[FN] <!--v2p348--> * Vide Vol. I. page 237, Note.
[FN] <!--v2p364--> * David Pareus, or Pare, was born of Protestant parents of a respectable rank, at Frankenstein, in Silesia, in 1548, and in due time put toa Grammar school there. Hisfather, whose name as a German was Wangler, (an appellation which the son afterwards, in conformity with literary pride, commuted into a word of the same signification derived from the Greek) becoming a widower, contracted a second marriage, the consequence of which was, that his design of making his son a scholar was frustrated, and he was disposed of otherwise as speedily as possible, by being first placed with an apothecary and then transferred to ashoemaker. Providence however had ordained otherwise respecting David, and many years had not elapsed, when, from the strong bent of his son's genius towards literary pursuits, his father resumed his first design ; and at about sixteen years of age he was sent to the College school of Hermsberg, and being so fortunate as to come under the instructions of Christopher Schilling, his progress in learning was equally sound and rapid. Being obliged to quit Hermsberg, owing to religious troubles, he removed in 1566, first to Amberg, and shortly after to Heidelberg, which University was then in a most flourishing condition. Here he seems to have remained till 1571, when he was appointed Curé of the Village of Schlettenbach ; but being shortly after recalled to Heidelberg, after other changes and reverses, he finally settled there in 1584 ; he obtained different Professorships in the University, and entered warmly into the controversies carrying on between the Lutherans and the Calvinists, and printed his ** Method of the Ubiquitarian Controversy.” He acquired the esteem of the Elector Palatine and other persons of high rank and consideration, and in 1589 printed, under their auspices, an Edition of the Scriptures in German with Notes. In 1592 he was elected an Ecclesiastical Counsellor, and the year following took his Doctor's Degree with great eclat. In 1617 there was kept an Evangelical Jubilee, in commemoration of the Church's deliverance from Popery an hundred years before. The solemnities were held three days, during which there were continual orations, disputations, poems, and sermons suited to the occasion. Pareus published some pieces on the subject, which drew upon him the resentment of the Jesuits of Mentz, who wrote a sharp censure upon him,
[FN] <!--v2p365--> to which he replied. In this year also appeared a ** Commentary of his on the Epistle to the Romans," which acquired great fame, and was speedily dispersed all over Europe. This gave such offence to our King, James I., by doctrines promulgated in it supposed to militate against regal prerogatives, that he ordered it to be burnt publicly in London by the common hangman. In 1619, Pareus, at the instance of the States-General, was pressed to go to the Synod of Dort; but he excused himself from becoming a deputy on account of his age and infirmities; though he wrote to the Synod his judgment on topics in dispute. He was very averse to all innovations in points of doctrine. He would not suffer any man to deviate a tittle from the Catechism of Ursinus, relative to Justification, and strenuously resisted, like a brave champion for the established doctrine, alterations in the Catechism of Heidelberg. "These innovations, he alleged, were a removal of the boundaries of truth, which ought to be sacred and immoveable. He even maintained that the humour of innovating foreboded an approaching ruin to the Church. He used to say with Luther, From a vain-glorious teacher, a litigious pastor, and useless questions, deliver thy Church, Good Lord! He was a great advocate for peace; and though he enjoyed little in his latter days, being obliged to flee from Heidelburg on account of the reverses that took place there, he yet returned, resolved to fetch his last breath in a beloved retreat he had formed at it; and dying in peace at his Pareanum in 1622, he was interred with all the honours his College could bestow on his memory.
[FN] <!--v2p365--> Of Pareus's Opera Exegetica, 4 vols. folio, 1647, Mr. Bickersteth in his
[FN] <!--v2p365--> * Christian Student" observes:—'** Have too much of what is valuable to be omitted in this list."
[FN] <!--v2p375--> * ADRIAN VANDER DBonmnE, one of the ministers of Leyden; a Remonstrant. Brandt’s Reformation in the Low Countries, Vol. III. p. 351.
[FN] <!--v2p375--> + After what has been said relative to this eminent man in the life of Bishop Davenant, prefixed to these Volumes (see Life; Vol. 1. pp. xii— xiv.) any thing further is almost unnecessary. Nor, while pursuing the course he has adopted towards others, need the Editor do more in this instance than remind the Reader that, as in the case of Calvin, the name of Arminius has been applied to many whose loose theology he would have despised, and whose irreligious practice he would have abhorred. It must be remembered, that it was the extremes of Ultra-Calvinism which reluctantly dragged him into the field of controversy scene ill-suited to the meek piety and humility of his temper; that the support of his views exposed him to persecution and reproach of the bitterest kind ; to which there is no doubt his life was sacrificed ; and that the whole tenor of his conduct, under circumstances the most trying, and the patient and fervent faith which he exemplificd in the excruciating torments of the bed of death, evince, as it
[FN] <!--v2p376--> ought to be acknowledged by every upright mind, that he was a sincere disciple and servant of the blessed Jesus.—In regard to the writings of Arminius, it may suffice to cite the remark of an eminently useful and candid Author. *« Some modern writers," says he, ** would be surprised to find how Calvinistic Arminius is. He would certainly have been viewed by them as a Calvinist.” — Bickersteth's Christian Student.
[FN] <!--v2p418--> * ATHANAsIUS, a celebrated Christian Bishop of the fourth Century. He was a native of Egypt, and a deacon of the Church of Alexandria under
[FN] <!--v2p419--> Alexander, the Bishop whom he succeeded in the dignity A.D. 326. He acquired the surname of Great on account of his zeal for the orthodox faith, in opposition to all heresies, especially the Arians, from whom he suffered the bitterest persecutions during the whole course of his episcopacy of 46 years. His works, which are numerous, contain a defence of the Holy Trinity, end of the Incarnation; of all which the best Edition is that of the Benedictines, 3 Vols. folio, Paris, 1698. The Creed which goes by his name, though supposed not to have proceeded immediately from his pen, contains the best illustration of his sentiments. Before it is hastily rejected by any one, it would be well to peruse with attention the remarks upon it iu Shepherd's valuable work—*“ Critical and Practical Elucidation of the Morning and Evening Prayer of the Church of England." It may be remarked of modern sources of information, that Gorton's Biographical Dictionary has an extended Life of Athanasius, well drawn up, and Clarke's ** Succession of Sacred Literature" contains a good account of his works.
[FN] <!--v2p423--> * PrscaTor or Fiscuer (John), a German Protestant Divine, born at Strasburg, in 1546. He was successively a Lutheran, a Calvinist, and an Arminian. But his attainments in divinity became so celebrated, that he was invited to accept the Professor’s Chair at Herborn, which he filled with such effect as to draw many students thither from different parts of Europe. He was very diligent and laborious; translated the Bible into German, and was the author of Commentaries on the Old and New Testaments, which are said to be valuable. His works were collected in four Vols. folio. He died in 1626. Vide Mosheim and Middleton.
[FN] <!--v2p440--> * Dominco Bangs, or Dommnicus Bannestus, mentioned also a little before, at page 407, was a Spaniard born at Valladolid in 1527. At the age of 15 he went to Salamanca, and after completing a course of study there, he entered into the Order of Preaching Friars. After he had taken the vows of his order, he was Professor of Theology for more than thirty-two years at Avila, Alcala de Henarez, Valladolid, and Salamanca, and died at Medina del Campo, Nov. 1, 1624, aged 77 years. Besides some Common, taries on different writings of Aristotle, and one or two other pieces, he wrote Commentaria Scholastica in primam partem Summe S. Thome, necnon in secundam Secunde—the work which Davenant cites. Venetiis, 1602, in three Vols. folio; also at Douay in 1614—16, in two Vols. folio. The first Edition appeared at Salamanca between the years 1584 and 1594. (Biographie Universelle, Tom. III. pp. 510, 311).
[FN] <!--v2p444--> * ALvAnEZ (Diego), a Spanish Dominican who distinguished himself in the Controversy between the Thomists and Molinists, and became Archbishop of Trani, in the kingdom of Naples. He wrote Commentaries upon Isaiah: De Auriliis Divine Gratie : Responsiones ad objectiones adversus Concordiam Liberi Arbitrii et Prascientie Divine; De Origine Pelagiana Ieresis. He died in 1635.
[FN] <!--v2p444--> + ABELARD, the celebrated Scholastic, as renowned in his day for his erudition, as for the romantic amour on account of which, perhaps, his name has been since most noted. He flourished in the 12th Century. Mosheim thus speaks of him in this period: —* the disciple cf Anselm, and most famous in this century on account of the elegance of his wit, the ex-
[FN] <!--v2p445--> tent of his erudition, the power of his rhetoric, and the bitterness of his unhappy fate.” He is generally regarded as the author of the Scholastic System which gave rise to so many subtleties in this age, and became so serviceable to Rome.
[FN] <!--v2p454--> * This refers to the opinion of the Divines assembled at the second Council of Orange, held in the year 529, at the Dedication of the Church which a Nobleman, and Priefect of the Gauls, had caused to be built in the city of Orange, and at which Ceesarius Bishop of Arles, and twelve other Bishops were present. The Council which ensued on this occasion was held
[FN] <!--v2p455--> in consequence of its being understood that there were some persons in the place who held sentiments not in unison with the orthodox faith. The Council drew up 8 articles concerning grace, confirmed by passages of Scripture and a Collection of some sentences out of the Fathers. "The articles were not only signed by the Bishops present, but also by Liberius the founder of the Church, and other persons of distinction.—— Vide Du Pin. Councils in the 6th Cent.
[FN] <!--v2p457--> * Held a few years prior to the assembling of the Synod of Dort, viz. in 1611,
[FN] <!--v2p457--> + ARNOLD against TiLENUvs.—Arnold (Henry) was a Pastor of Delph, who was present at the Synod of Dort, as one of the Deputies from the Churches of South Holland. Tilenus (Daniel) was a disciple of Arminius, Minister of Sedan, and one of the Remonstrants. For an act of his see Life of Bishop Davenant, p. xix.
[FN] <!--v2p457--> + Tomson (Richard) was a Dutch Arminian, of English parents, and educated at Clare Hall, Cambridge. He published, first, Elenchus refutationis Tortura Torti contra Becanum, Lond. 1611; and afterwards, the Treatise here referred to by Bishop Davenant, Lugd. Bat. 1618, the nature of which will be understood by the title of Bishop Abbott's reply to it, mentioned in a subsequent Note, where that prelate is introduced, a few pages onward.
[FN] <!--v2p462--> * Robert Abbot, elder brother of the celebrated Archbishop. He emerged into notice by his talent in preaching; for which he became noted in the University of Oxford, not long after he took his orders in 1581, and which first obtained him preferment in Worcester, and in a short time the living of Bingham, in Notts, to which he was presented by John Stanhope, Esq. on hearing him at St. Paul's Cross. He soon became no less eminent on account of his writings, than he had been for his pulpit oratory ; particularly against Dr. William Bishop, Popish Bishop of the serial diocese of Calcedon, on the subject of the Sacrament. In 1597, he proceeded D.D., and soon after the accession of James I. that monarch appointed him one of his Chaplains in ordinary, and conceived so high an opinion of his writings, that he ordered his own Commentary upon part of the Apocalypse to be printed in 1608 with the second Edition of Abbot's book De Antichristo. In. 1609, he was chosen Master of Baliol College, Oxford, at which he had matriculated, and which rose into distinction by his exertions, In1610, he was nominated by the King one of the first fellows of the Royal College at Chelsea, then newly founded for the encouragement of Polemical Divinity ; and, as Fuller in his Church History remarks, ** engarrisoned with the ablest champions of the Protestant cause.” Robert was, like his brother, a truly zealous opponent of Popery. This his subsequent appointment
[FN] <!--v2p463--> as Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford afforded him public opportunities of evincing ; and on this account mainly he was in 1615 selected by King James to fill the vacant See of Salisbury, as was declared by his Majesty on his being presented to do homage. He was consecrated by his own brother, who liad been rapidly advanced from Lichfield to London, and to the Archiepiscopate of Canterbury about five years before; and it is worthy of remark, that this isthe only instance of two brothers occupying the Episcopal bench in England, since the Reformation, to the time of the present excellent Bishops of Winchester and Chester. Robert filled his See little more than one year, dying in March, 1617, in the 58th year of his age; but universally lamented by the inhabitants of Salisbury, having endeared himself to them by every trait which could adorn the Episcopal office. The Bishop both in manners and talents was superior to the Archbishop, who was himself no common man. His published works were very popular in that age, but mostly controversial. 'The one referred to above was a reply to a work of Richard Thomson, whom there was occasion to notice at p. 448. "The Bishop finished the book only the day before he died, and it was published by his Chaplain, the famous Dr. Featley, under the direction of the Archbishop; the full title running thus: Jn Ricardi Thomsoni Angli-Belgici diatribam de amissione et intercessione justificationis et gratia;, animadversio brevis. Londini, 4to. 1618.—He left many things in MS. among which was a Latin Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, now in the Bodleian Library, leftby its author in a state quite ready for publication. Were this work translated and given to the world, it would be an invaluable addition to that part of sacred theology.
[FN] <!--v2p467--> * Pro sententia Huberania, in the Original :— The Editor presumes that the author above referred to by Bishop Davenant is Samuel Huser, who gave rise to a vehement controversy in the Lutheran Church, at the close of the sixteenth and in the early part of the seventeenth century. Walch,
[FN] <!--v2p486--> * BnapwanDINE (Thomas) a learned English Divine of the 14th Century. He was born at Hartfield, in Sussex, and educated at Merton College, Oxford, where he took the degree of D.D. and became Proctor and Divinity Professor of the University, and after being appointed Chancellor of the Diocese of London, attended Edward III. as his Confessor during his warsin France. Whilst so situated, a vacancy occurred in the See of Canterbury, and the Monks elected him Archbishop; but Edward, who was fond of his company, refused to part with him. Another vacancy happening soon after, the Monks elected him a second time, and Edward yielded to their desires, and Bradwardine was consecrated Archbishop in 1349 ; but he died 40 days after his consecration at Lambeth, and was buried at Canterbury. He excelled in Mathematical knowledge, and wrote several treatises on that science which have been published; among them is one on the quadrature of the circle. He was most distinguished, however, for his accurate and solid investigations in Divinity ; and is best known as theauthor of a book against Pelagianism, entitled De Causa Dci. ‘The reader unacquainted with it, but desirous of knowing something of the contents of a thick and closely printed Latin folio, or of the nature of a work as profound in argument as it is elaborate in illustration, may consult Milner, who, in Vol. IV. of his Church History, has given a good account of it. The original itself is well worthy of examination, if it were only to convince some of the would-be-thought theologians of our time, that humility and reserve would become them better than a jejune expression of opinions on suhjects which have so occupied men of gigantic minds; and to display to others the deep piety and ardent devotion which existed with solid learning, extensive acquirements, and a lofty genius. The fame of this work, it is said, led Chaucer, in his * Nuns’ Priests’ tale," to rank Bradwardine with St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo. An Apologue in this treatise appears to have furnished Parnell with the story of his beautiful Poem “ The Hermit."— The best Edition is that by Sir Henry Saville, printed at London, in 1618.
[FN] <!--v2p496--> * John Arnold Corvinus was not more distinguished as a lawyer than asa theologian. During the theological disputes which raged in Holland in
[FN] <!--v2p497--> the former part of the 17th Century, he espoused the side of the Remonstrants or Arminians, among whom he laboured as a minister. Disgusted with the persecutions to which he was exposed, he was obliged in 1622 to retire into the Duchy of Sleswig, whence he proceeded into France. He was admitted Doctor of Law at Orleans, and afterwards practised as an advocate at Amsterdam, where he was appointed professor of Law. Besides various excellent works on the civil law, some of which are deservedly es. teemed to this day, he wrote several theological pieces, the most distinguished of which is his Defensio Sententie Jac. Arminii de predestinatione, gratiá Dei, libero hominis arbitrio, &c. adversum Daniclem Tilenum. Lugduni, 1613, 8vo. He is said to have converted his adversary. Corvinus died in 1650. (Biographie Universelle, tom. X. p. 27.)
[FN] <!--v2p498--> * This Council was convened in the year 418, by two Bishops of Gaul, Heros and Lazarus, who joined with Orosius, a Spanish Priest of that period, and drew up a Petition embodying the errors wherewith they charged Pelagius, as contained in his books, and taught by Coelestinus his disciple.
[FN] <!--v2p499--> This accusation was preferred to a synod of fourteen Bishops, held at Diospolis, antiently called Lydda, a city of Palestine. Eulogius of Ceesaria was President, and John of Jerusalem held the second place. Pelagius appeared and disowned the errors attributed to him. Augustine has recorded the acts of this Council in the Book of Pelagius's acts, and has also given an abridgment of them in his 106th Letter.——Vide Du Pin and Milner,
[FN] <!--v2p499--> * This refers to a Council held about the same period and on the same occasion as above described.
[FN] <!--v2p514--> * ViTALIS was a Spaniard contemporary with Augustine, and considered as the founder of tlie Semipelagians. Before he fell into the errors here attributed to him, he had been bewildered on other grounds, and wrote his Diocesan, Capreolus Bishop of Carthage, to know if he might say, that God is born of a Virgin. ——Vide Du Pin, Vol. II. Cent. 5, p. 49.
[FN] <!--v2p514--> + These were Presbyters of Marseilles originally called Massalia. Pelagianism having lost its first ground, these men took refuge in the more specious notions of Vitalis.— Vide Milner, Vol. II. p. 388.
[FN] <!--v2p519--> * William Estivs, an eminent Dutch divine of the Roman communion ; he was born at Gorcum, in Holland, about 1542. After he had finished his Classical studies at Utrecht, he studied Divinity and Philosophy at Louvain, where he taught those studies for ten years; and afterwards became Professor of Divinity in the University of Douay, was subsequently elected to the Chancellorship, and died there in 1613. He was equally distinguished for his learning, modesty, and benevolence. Of his numerous works, the following are most known, viz. 1. Commentarii in quatuor libros Sextentiarum. Douai, 1615. 4tomis,fol. Du Pin says that this is one of the best theological works of which the Roman Church can boast. 2. Annotationes in precipua difficiliora Scripture loca, Antverpie, 1621, folio: of this work, which appears to have been highly esteemed, there were several Editions. 3. In omues B. Pauli et aliorum. Apostolorum Epistolas Commentaria. Douai, 1614, 2tomis, folio. Du Pin commends this as one of the best works of the kind; but it appears that Estius was prevented by death from proceeding further than 1 John v., and that the rest of the Commentary was supplied by Bartholomew De la Pierre. (Vide Chalmers's Biographical Dictionary, and Moreri. )
[FN] <!--v2p523--> * To what has been observed respecting Grevinchovius at p. 304, it may be added, that he took an active part in the controversy between the Calvinists and Arminians in Holland. Besides various publications written in the Dutch Language, he wrote (in reply to William Ames's Disceptatio Scholastica de Arminii sententia, quá electionem omnem particularem fidei preevise docet inniti, Amst. 1593, 4to.) Dissertatio de duabus questionibus hoc tempore controversis ; quarum prima est de Reconciliatione per mortem Christi impetratà omnibus et singulis hominibus : altera, de electione ex fide previsá, Roterodami, 1595, 4to. To this treatise Ames rejoined, as the Reader will have observed in the early part of the 4th Chapter of this Dissertation, in a Rescriptio Scholastica, published at Leyden, in 1597, 12mo. ( VP'alchii Bibliotheca Theologica, tom. Il. pp. 543, 544. 548, 549.)
[FN] <!--v2p531--> * Augustine Manronar, an eminent Protestant divine of the 16th century, was born in the dukedom of Lorrain in 1506. Having made great proficiency in his studies, in a Monastery of Augustine Friars, whose licentious morals appear to have inspired him with a dislike for their religion, he quitted that monastery, and pursued his studies first in France, and afterwards at Lausanne, where he made open profession of the Protestant religion, and was admitted into the Ministry. He was chosen pastor at Vevey, and then at Rouen, in Normandy, where he contributed to the diffusion of the principles of the Reformation. In 1561, he was present at the memorable conference held at Poissy between Beza and the Cardinal of
[FN] <!--v2p532--> Lorrain, in which he distinguished himself by his ability and zeal in defence of the Protestant cause. In the following year the civil wars broke out in France; and, Rouen being taken, Montmorency, Constable of France, threw Marlorat into prison, on the false charge of being a seducer of the people. Onthis charge, of which No proofs were brought, he was condemned to be hanged, his head then to be set upon a pole on the bridge of the city, and his property confiscated. He accordingly suffered Oct. 30, 1562, in the 56th year of his age. He wrote Commentaries on Genesis, Job, the book of Psalms, and the Song of Solomon, and on the prophecies of Isaiah ; and a book of Common Places. But his greatest work is entitled, Novi Testasenti Catholica Expositio Ecclesiastica, of which there were not fewer than nine Editions between the years 1561 and 1604. It was formerly held in the highest estimation, and deservedly so: it contains Erasmus's Latin Version of the New Testament, and the Expositions are collected with singular industry and ability from the works of the early Ecclesiastical writers as well as from modern Protestant Interpreters and Commentators, with which the Author has interwoven his own judicious remarks. English translations of his Exposition of the Psalms and of the Gospels of St. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and of the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse, were published at London during the reign of Queen Elizabeth. (Chalmers's Biographical Dictionary, Vol. XXI. p. 332. Walchii Bibliotheca Theologica, Vol. 1I. pp. 414. 606.)
[FN] <!--v2p538--> * Suares or Suarez (Francis), a learned theologian, born at Grenada, in Spain, in 1548. After having completed his education as a law student at Salamanca, he entered into the Society of the Jesuits, who employed him to teach philosophy at Segovia, and he subsequently occupied the Chairs of theology at Valladolid, Rome, Alcala, and Salamanca. The first Professorship in the University of Coimbra becoming vacant, it was bestowed on Suares by Philip II. at the request of the heads of that Institution. He took an active part in the disputes which originated from the Theological doctrine of Father Molina, on the subject of Grace, which Suares endeavoured to explain by means of the principle termed ** Congruism.” He published a work against our King, James I., in defence of the Roman faith, for which he received the public thanks of the Pope and the King of Spain ; but the book was prohibited in England and France, and ordered to be burnt in London by the common hangman. His death took place in Sept. 1617, at Lisbon, whither he had gone to be present at Conferences to be held before the Legate of the Holy See. His works, extending to twentythree Volumes folio, were published at Mentz and Lyons, 1630, &c. and reprinted at Venice in 1740. His ** Tractatus de Legibus, ac Deo Legislatore," esteemed his best work, was printed in London, 1679, folio. An abridgment of the works of Suares, by Father Noel, appeared at Geneva, 1732, two Vols. folio.— Moreri.— Biog. Univ.
[FN] <!--v2p540--> * MaLDERUS, or John MALDER, who was first a Doctor in Theology and Regius Professor in the University of Louvain, was nominated Bishop of Antwerp by the Governors of the Low Countries, and on the 7th of August, 1611, took possession of his See, over which he presided 22 years, and died at Antwerp, Oct. 21st, 1633. He is said to have been a man of singular modesty and learning. Besides treatises on Confession, and on the abuses of Mental Restrictions, he wrote, what he called, a Refutation of the Synod of Dort, (vide p. 527) a Commentary on the Song of Solomon, Theological Meditations, and several Volumes of Commentaries on the Summa of Thomas Aquinas. (Richard et Giraud, Bibliothégue Sacrée, tom II. p. 381, et tom. XV. p. 493.)
[FN] <!--v2p549--> * Pascnasius Ratrrertus, a celebrated Benedictine of the 9th Cen. tury, was born at Soissons, and was carefully educated by the Monks of Notre Dame. He took the religious habit in the Abbey of Corbey, of which he became Abbot. About the year 831 he wrote a treatise ** On the body and blood of Christ,” in which he maintained, that after the consecration
[FN] <!--v2p550--> of the bread and wine in the Lord’s Supper, nothing remained of these symbols but the outward figure, under which the identical body and blood of Christ were really present. Thus was revived and brought into shape in the Latin Church that doctrine which has occasioned so much contention in the Church and havoc among Christians—the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which had been first started by a Monk at the beginning of the 7th Century. This doctrine being thus introduced into the Western Church occasioned a violent controversy. It was vigorously opposed by Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mentz, the most considerable man of his times, who says, it was an error newly broached. Most of the learned men of that age took part in the controversy it excited. Paschasius was constrained to resign his Abbey in consequence of the opposition his opinion met, and he died soon after, in 865. His other works are Commentaries on St. Matthew; on Psalm xliv.; and on the Lamentations of Jeremiah : with Treatises De Partu Virginis; De Corpore Christi, &c. His works were collected and published by Father Sirmond, in 1618.
[FN] <!--v2p555--> * SuanEs, vide Note p. 629.—VasaqueEs, or Gabriel Vazquez, a Jesuit, author of various works collected in 10 vols. folio. Lugduni, 1620, containing Commentaries upon Thomas Aquinas, and similar works. He died at Alcala, in 1604, aged 55.—( Antonii Biblioth. Hispania. )
[FN] <!--v2p555--> + ANDREAS VEGAs, or Andreas de Vega, a Spanish Franciscan, a Professor at Salamanca. He was at the Council of Trent in 1546, and was looked upon there to be a very able Divine, and had a great share in the Decrees of that Council concerning Justification. He wrote a defence of them in fifteen Books, in which he treats at large of Justification ; after which come fifteen questions upon the same subject, which are, as it were, an abridgment of that work, in which he treats of Faith, Grace, Good Works, and Merits, printed at Venice in 1548, and at Cologne in 1572; and, with a Preface by Canisius, at Aschaffembourg in 1621. This work of Vega’s isa Commentary upon the Decrees of the 6th Session of the Council of ‘Trent upon Justification.—[F'or a clear understanding of the different opinions on
[FN] <!--v2p556--> this important subject, and the point upon which all difficulty turns, the Editor would recommend to every doubting mind the perusal of Scott's Continuation of Milner, Vol. II. chap. xiii.] —Vega wrote also a Commenlary upon some other passages in the Council of Trent, printed at Alcala, in 1574. A Commentary likewise upon the Psalms, bearing his name, was printed at the same place in 1599.—( Du Pin.)
[FN] <!--v2p557--> * VonsTIUS (Conrad), an eminent Divine of the Arminian sect, born at Cologne in 1569, was the son of a dyer with a numerous family, who secretly seceded to the Protestant Communion. Conrad, who was destined to a literary life, after passing five years at a village grammar-school, was entered, in 1587, at the College of St. Lawrence, at Cologne, which he quitted without taking a degree, but was subsequently sent to Haerlem and Heidelburgh, at which University he was created a Doctor of Divinity. After visiting the Academies of Switzerland, and giving lectures on theology at Geneva, in 1596, he accepted the Professorship of the latter faculty at Steinfurt, where he also officiated as Minister until 1610, when he received a call to succeed Arminius in the professorship of Theology at Ley-
[FN] <!--v2p558--> den. Having accepted this offer, he soon became involved in the controversial war which raged in the Netherlands ; and the Gomarists, or rigid Calvinists, taking advantage of a book which he had lately published, entitled, Tractatus Theologicus de Deo, sive de Natura et Attributiis Dei, they accused him of heresy, and engaged several foreign Universities in the party. In particular, they obtained the aid of our own James I., who, on receiving the book of Vorstius, in an hour's time drew up a large Catalogue of heresies from it, which he sent to his minister at the Hague, with an order to certify to the States how much he detested those alleged errors: He also caused his book to be burnt in London; and informed the States, who had sent a doubtful reply that they would inquire into the case, that if they did not dismiss Vorstius, none of his subjects should visit Leyden. James moreover wrote against Vorstius, who respectfully replied; all which would not have prevailed upon the States to dismiss him, but for the untimely appearance of a book by some of his disciples, entitled, De Officio Christiani Hominis, which contained some Anti-trinitarian doctrines; and although formally disclaimed by Vorstius, so much odium was thereby excited against him, that he provisionally resigned the professorship, from which, by the Synod of Dort, he was entirely dismissed, and banished by the States of Holland from their territories. He lived for more than two years in secrecy, frequently changing his abode in fear for his life, until in 1623 the Duke of Holstein collected the dispersed followers of Arminianism, and assigned them a spot of ground for building a city. To this place Vorstius retired, but died soon after at Toningen, in Sept. 1622, at the age of 53. According to Bayle and Sandius, the opinions of this theologian probably leaned towards Socinianism, or at least he dogmatized on the attributes of God in a manner which was quite unusual at the period.—The Reader who desires to see a more ample account of him and his opinions, may consult Nichols's Life of Arminius with advantage, Appendix P. pp. 202— 236.
[SEC] gallican|On the Gallican Controversy
[H2] ON THE CONTROVERSY AMONG THE FRENCH DIVINES OF THE REFORMED CHURCH CONCERNING THE GRACIOUS AND SAVING WILL OF GOD TOWARDS SINFUL MEN.*
[BODY] <!--v2p570-571-->THERE are some who so contend for the particular election in Christ, through the mere good pleasure of God, of some certain persons, and their effectual and irrevocable calling to grace and glory, that at the same time they assert, that, Christ having died for all men individually, ‘with some general intention, “God, by his universal grace, founded on his death, which was sufficient in itself, and by a suitable invitation and calling to repentance, although in different ways, gives to all individually that they may be saved if they will ; ‘so that it arises from themselves alone, and the hardness of their heart repelling the means of salvation, if they are not saved. Which was the opinion of D. Cameron,t B. M. and as it appears to them of the/Deputies from England and the Republic of Bremen at the Synod of Dort.
[BODY] <!--v2p571-572-->There are, ^on the other hand, those who deny that Christ died for all men individually, with the intention of saving them, and that God really wills that all men individually should be saved. They wish that the opinion of the Deputies from England and Bremen on this subject should be rejected by the Synod of Dort, or referred to an opposite Synod : and think the opinion of Cameron and his disciples as pure Arminianism, a hydra of errors, opposed to the Synod of Dort, a subversion of the nature of the Divine law, of the Gospel, of the necessity of the Christian Religion, to be expelled from the Reformed Churches.
[BODY] <!--v2p572-->THE opinion of the Divines of ExcrAwp, the most celebrated in the whole Christian world, is requested on this controversy, as it appears that this might conduce not a little towards confirming the peace of the Reformed Church in France.
[BODY] <!--v2p572-->THE .
[BODY] <!--v2p572-->JUDGMENT OF BISHOP DAVENANT..
[BODY] <!--v2p572-->“THE gracious and saving will of God towards sinners is to be considered, as effectually applying to some persons, of his special mercy, the means of saving grace, according to that saying of the Apostle, He hath mercy on whom he will; or, as appointing sufficiently for all, of his common philanthropy, the means of saving grace, applicable to all for salvation, according to the tenor of the covenant of grace, as the Evangelist has said, God so loved the world, &c. Those whom the Divine will or good pleasure embraces under the first description, on them it always confers the means of saving grace in this life, and the end of grace, that is, life eternal, or glory, in the world to come (Rom. vill. 28, 29, &c.; Eph. 1.3—5, &c. Those whom the Divine will embraces only under the latter description, on them it sometimes confers the means of saving grace, and sometimes does not; but it never confers the end of grace, that is, eternal life.
[BODY] <!--v2p572-573-->in this opinion, which is said to have been that of D. Cameron, the first member of the sentence 1s legitimately constructed, if he understands, that particular election, mere good pleasure, and effectual calling to grace and glory, depend in such a manner on the Divine will, that it does not separate this Divine will from the foreseen acts of the human will. For he who does this, falls into the error of the Semipelagians.
[BODY] <!--v2p573-->"The second member of the sentence is involved and perplexed with so many ambiguous forms of speaking, that it is difficult to determine its truth or falsehood, without first dividing it into portions.
[H3] PART I.
[BODY] <!--v2p573-->Christ died for all men individually, with some general
[BODY] <!--v2p573-->intention.
[BODY] <!--v2p573-->Christ is rightly said to have died for all men, inasmuch as on his death is founded a covenant of salvation, applicable to all men while they are in this world. Nor can he be improperly said to have died for each individually, inasmuch as his death may profit each for salvation, according to the tenor of the new covenant, none being excluded. On the other hand, it cannot profit any individual, contrary to the tenor of that covenant, although he should be of the elect. If Cain or Judas had believed and repented, he would be saved through the benefit and merit of the death of Christ. If David or Peter had not believed, nor repented, he would not be saved. In this sense the death of Christ may be understood to be set equally before all men individually.
[BODY] <!--v2p573-574-->What is added in the last place, concerning the general intention of God, by which he wills that all men individually should be saved through the death of his Son, needs explanation. It must be observed, therefore, that according to the custom of the Scriptures, the Divine will or intention sometimes denotes merely the appointment of means to an end, although there às no determinate will in God of producing that end by those means. And the Schoolmen refer this intention or will of God to the common order of Providence. In this sense he willed and in-' tended the obedience and salvation of the angels who apostatised, inasmuch as he furnished them with gifts, fit in. themselves and suitable, to perform obedience and obtain salvation. And in this sense God, with a general intention, wills life to all men, inasmuch as he willed the death of Christ to be the fountain and cause of life to all men individually, according to the tenor of the evangelical covenant. But we must observe, that the Scriptures mention another will or intention of God, and that properly so called, which never fails in producing the good intended, and which the Schoolmen refer to the order of special predestination. Of this intention or will of God, Augustine rightly says from the Psalmist, (Ench. cap. 97) In heaven and in earth there are some things which God did not both will and perform; there are some things which he willed and, did not perform, though he hath done all things whatsoever he would. And Aquinas, (1. qu. 10, art. 6.) Whatever God simply wills, he performs. If, therefore, by this general intention of God to procure the salvation of all men by the death of Christ, they wish to exclude the special will, and special and effectual operation of God in effecting the salvation of the elect; or if they would infer from thence, That the benefit of the death of Christ, that is, the grace of God and eternal salvation of men (as far as relates to God) is intended for all men individually with the same kind of will, and is applied by the same mode of operation, really and actually to be had and obtained by each individual, according as he makes a good use of his own free-will; they bring forward Semipelagianism. But if by this general intention they mean nothing more than a general aptitude and sufficiency in the death of Christ to effect the salvation of all men individually in the mode of an universal cause, or a general appointment of God concerning the salvation of all men individually, who, through the grace of God, duly apply to themselves this universal cause; then there is no need to reject this form of speaking.
[H3] PART II.
[BODY] <!--v2p575-577-->“That God, by his universal grace founded in the death of Christ, which was sufficient in itself, and by a suitable invitation and calling to repentance, although in different ways, grants to all men individually, that they may be saved 1f. they will. The term universal grace does not sound well with the Orthodox; for those gifts which are bestowed upon all men individually (although they are given to the unworthy and the undeserving) are not referred to that which is called the grace of Christ, but to the common philanthropy of God. From whence the opinion, That the grace of God is universal, or is given to all individually, seemed to be erroneous to Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, and the other adversaries of the Pelagians. If, therefore, this Author means by universal grace, That the grace of Christ is given and actually communicated to every individual of the human race, I do not see by what means this form of speech can be defended. For the saving grace of Christ (if we believe the Apostles) is communicated to individuals by the preaching of the Gospel. (Mark xvi. 15, 16; Rom. i. 16; 1 Cor. 1. 18, 21.) From whence Prosper says, They live without grace, and are not partakers of Christian grace, to whom Christ was never preached. The Apostle affirms the same thing of the Ephesians, before Christ was preached to them. (Eph. ii. 12.) But if by universal grace, he means nothing more than an universal capacity of salvation in all persons living in this world, or an universal propensity in God to save every man, if he should believe in Christ, he ought to correct his language, lest by unusual, and a less sound form of words, he should give offence to the Orthodox. Further, this universal grace of some kind being admitted, that which he adds, That God, through this universal grace, by an invitation suitable and sufficient in itself, calls all men to repentance, is refuted by the experience of time, and the contrary event of things. For if he speaks of repentance, which remission of sins and eternal life follows, that invitation or calling is not apt or sufficient in itself for such repentance, which does not send the penitent to Christ. But that which sends the penitent to the death of Christ for the expiation of the sins of men, is altogether unknown out of the Church, where the Gospel of Christ is not known. Therefore an invitation and calling apt and sufficient for saving repentance is not given to all men. Moreover, neither ought this opinion to be approved, That God by his universal grace grants io all men individually that they may be saved if they will. For first, it is foolish to assert, That infants, who are born the children of wrath, and die out of the Church, can be saved if they will; since they have not the use of reason or free-will. By the same rule it might be said, That they could walk, :and join themselves to any Christian church, if they would. But I ask, as to adults, what is this, That every indivi- _ dual of them can be saved, if they will? Are they not willing to be saved? Without doubt they are. For to be saved, is nothing else but to be happy, which all men individually desire. But perhaps these words are to be understood, If they are willing to believe in Christ, they may be saved. I do not dispute, that all men individually may be saved, who are rightly willing to believe in Christ; but I also assert, that every individual who thus believes cannot be damned. Yet I add, that universal grace is not proved by a power of obtaining salvation, conceived by those who are in a state not yet purified, nor ever to be purified. It is therefore evident, that the condition, If they are willing to believe in Christ, cannot be fulfilled by many, unless God wills to send to them preachers of the Gospel. (Rom. x. 14, 15.) For as no one can see a visible object when it is absent, so when a credible object is absent, no one can exercise the act of believing. "There are, therefore, multitudes who cannot be saved, because they cannot believe in Christ. They cannot believe in Christ for obtaining remission of sins, because the act of believing pre-supposes the object having been proposed to the sinner, in which he may believe, as may be collected from Romans iii. 25, 26.
[H3] PART III.
[BODY] <!--v2p577-->c Jt is through men themselves alone, and the hardness of
[BODY] <!--v2p577-->their hearts, that they are not saved.
[BODY] <!--v2p577-->It is true, that the corruption and hardness of the human heart is the real and positive cause which drives the wicked from salvation, and thrusts them into perdition. itis moreover certain, that God neither will nor can work in those to whom he deigns to grant the means of grace, a contempt or abuse of these means. For as the sun cannot cause darkness, or cold in the air; so God. cannot cause malice and wickedness in the human heart. This, however great it is in repelling the means of grace, is wholly to be imputed to man alone; in no way to God. But it ought to be added, in the last place, that there is no hardness in the human will so obstinate, that God cannot soften it if he will, and which he will not at length soften in all the elect, by that special mercy of which the Apostle speaks, He hath mercy on whom he will, &c.
[BODY] <!--v2p577-->I think, therefore, that the opinion of Cameron was here badly expressed.
[BODY] <!--v2p577-->fI know that the opinion of the English Divines given at the Synod of Dort, neither establishes universal grace, nor acknowledges that apt and sufficient means of salvation are granted to all men individually upon whom the Gospel hath not shone.
[BODY] <!--v2p577-578-->£Lastly. I think that no Divine of the Reformed Church of sound judgment, will deny a general intention or appointment concerning the salvation of all men individually by the death of Christ, on this condition—If they should believe. For this intention or appointment of God is general, and is plainly revealed in the Holy Scriptures, although the absolute and not to be frustrated intention of God, concerning the gift of faith and eter- , nal life to some persons, is special, and is limited to the elect alone.
[BODY] <!--v2p578-->So I have maintained, and do maintain.
[BODY] <!--v2p578-->JOANN. SARISBURIENSIS.
[END] FINIS.
[FN] <!--v2p570--> * Vide Life of Bishop Davenant, p. xxxix.
[FN] <!--v2p570--> + John CAMERON was an eminent divine among the French Protestants, born at Glasgow about the year 1580. After completing his literary education at his native place, he was in 1600 induced to visit Bourdeux, and
[FN] <!--v2p571--> by the minister of that city was appointed to teach the learned languages at Bergeron. He was subsequently appointed Professor of Philosophy at Sedan, and after remaining in that capacity two years, returned to Bourdeux, and engaged in the study of Divinity. In 1608 he assumed the office of Minister in that town, and then accepted of the Divinity Chair at Saumur, where he continued until the dispersion of that academy in 1621. He then removed to England, and was made by King James Master of the Colleges and Divinity Professor at Glasgow ; but found the appointment so disagreeable, that he returned to France, where the disputes between the two religions were now bringing on a civil war. Cameron, whose principles disinclined him to violence, having opposed the emissaries of the Duke de Rohan, who endeavoured to induce the people of Montauban to take arms, was attacked by a zealot of the party in the streets, and severely beaten ; and such was the effect upon his mind and body, that he died soon after, aged 46. According to Bayle, he was a man of great parts and learning, but insufferably long-winded and vain. He was the author of an attempt to reconcile the doctrine of predestination with a more consoling notion of the Divine justice and benevolence, a theory which was more fully developed in the ** System of Universal Grace," by his disciple Amyraut, but which Mosheim says, after examination, he was persuaded was no more than Arminianism or Pelagianism artfully dressed up, and ingeniously covered with a half-transparent veil of specious, but ambiguous expressions. Cameron's Theological Lectures are printed in three Vols. 4to. Saumur, and in one Vol. folio, Geneva.
