<!-- psalm 102 | vol 3 | scan pages 14-17 -->

<!-- PAGE 14 -->
1. A Prayer. By a Sufferer, when he is troubled, and before Jehovah pours out his comjplaint. The psalm is called a -prayer because petition constitutes its substance. See above, on Ps. xc. 1.    The  translation for the sufferer (or afflicted) would also be grammatical, and perfectly consistent with the real design of the composUion. But phrases of this kind, in the titles of the psalms, so constantly indicate the author or performer, and when only one occurs the former, that a departure from this usage here is highly improbable, and the assumption of it altogether arbitrary. At the same time, the indefinite expression, a sufferer^ or an afflicted 'person^ seems to be intentionally used for the purpose of giving the psalm an unrestricted application, though the primary reference is no doubt to the sufiering kings of Israel, in whom the sufferings of the people were concentrated and represented. The other terms of the inscription all occur in psalms of David ; troubled ( or overwhelmed) in Ps. Ixi. 3 (2) ; com'plaint (or moaning) in Ps. Iv. 3 (2.) Ixiv. 2(1); and jpouring out the soul in Ps. Ixii. 9 (8.) This agrees with the general Davidic character of the composition, and favours Ilengstenberg's hypothesis, not otherwise demonstrable, nor even very probable, that this psalm forms the connecting link between the pious resolutions of Ps. 101 and the joyful acknowledgments of Ps. 103, and was composed in prophetic foresight of the straits to which the theo cratical state should be reduced, and in which the sufferings of David, here immediately described, should, as it were, be realized anew. The psalm may be divided into two parts, in the first of which the tone of lamentation or complaint predominates, vs. 2— 12 (1—11), while in the second it is tempered and controlled by the contemplation of God's attributes, and confident anticipation of his favour, vs. 13—29 (12—28.)

<!-- PAGE 15 -->
2(1.) Jehovah^ hear my prayer^ and let my cry (for help) utUo thee, come. With this verse compare Ps. iv.. 2(1.) xvii. 1. xviii. 7 (6.) liv. 4 (2.) There is no more reason for regarding these resemblances as imitations by ^ later writer in the case before us than in any of the others. And if not such, they may serve to show, that David only asks, for the future or for others, that favour which he has himself sought and experienced already.

<!-- PAGE 16 -->
3 (2.) Hide not thy fact from me; in the day (there is) aistress to me J incline to me thine ear ; in the day I call^ make haste (arid) answer me. Compare Ps. x. 1. xiii. 1. xvii. 6. xviii. 7 (6.) xxvii. 9. xxxi. 3 (2.) Ivi. 10 (9.) Ixvi. 14 (13.) Ixxi. 2. We find here accumulated nearly all the phrases used by David to express the same ideas elsewhere. This is not unnatural if we suppose him to have been preparing a form of complaint and supplication for the use of his successors in their worst distresses.

4 (3.) For wasted in smoke are my days, and my bones like a burning are ki^idled. With the first clause compare Ps. xxxvii. 20. The bones are mentioned as the seat of strength. See above, on Ps. vi. 3 (2.) xxxi. 11 (10.) xxxv. 10. xlii. 11 (10.) This description, although strictly applicable to the case of individual sufierers, may also be applied to the decline of the theocratic monarchy and the approach of its catastrophe.

5 (4.) Smitten like grass and withered is my heart.^ for I have forgotten to eat my bread. The first verb is used to describe the effect of the sun on plants, Ps. cxxi. 6. Isai. xlix. 10. (Compare Jon. iv. 7.) The heart is mentioned as the seat of life. The common version of the last clause {so that I forget) is ungrammatical. The failure of the strength is rather described as immediately occasioned by the want of food (1 Sam. xxviii. 20), and this by loss of appetite from extreme distress. See below, on Ps. cvii. 18, and compare 1 Sam. i. 7. xx. 34. 1 Kings xxi. 4. Forgotten to eat, litersLWy, forgotten from eating, so as not to eat, a common idiomatic use of the preposition from in Hebrew.

6 (5.) From the voice of my groaning, my bone cleaves to my flesh. The word voice implies an audible and loud expression of distress. The first clause means, in consequence of the agony which makes me groan. My bone may signify each of my bones, or be used collectively for the whole skeleton or framework of the 1* lO PSA.LM   CII. body. The only natural explanation of tbis clause is that it describes emaciation, as a consequence and symptom of extreme distress.    See above, on Ps. xxii. 15, IS (14, 17.)

<!-- PAGE 17 -->
7 (6.) I resemble a pelican of the wilderness ; I am become like an owl (haunting) ruins. The simple idea conveyed by these figures is that of extreme loneliness and desolation. Beyond the fact that they inhabit solitudes, the natural history of the birds mentioned is of no exegetical importance.

8 (7.) I have watched^ and have been like a sparrow dioelling alone upon a house-top. The first words suggest the idea of a solitary vigil. As to the word translated sparrow., see above, on Ps. Ixxxiv. 4 (3.) The word dwelling is supplied in the translation of the last clause, in order to retain the form of the original expression, which is that of an active participle. Some suppose the idea to be that of a bird, deprived of its mate or of its young.

9 (8.) All the day my eTiemies have taunted me, my infuriated (foes) swear by vie. The verb in the first clause suggests the ideas of contempt and hatred, calumny and insult. See above, on Ps. xlii. 11 (10.) The first word of the last clause is a passive participle, my enraged (or maddened) ones., those who are mad (i. e. insane with enmity) against me. The last phrase does not mean swear at me., i. e. vent their rage by oaths and curses, nor are sivorn against me., neither of which is justified by Hebrew usage ; but swear by me, i. e. use me as a formula of execration, imprecating upon others misery like mine. Compare Isai. Ixv. 15. Jer. xxix. 22. The preterite forms imply a long previous continuance of this furious persecution, as all the day does its constant, unremitted raging.

10 (9.) For ashes like bread have I eaten^ and my drink with weeping have mixed.    The ashes, in which he sat, or with which
