<!-- psalm 103 | vol 3 | scan pages 18-35 -->

<!-- PAGE 18 -->
he was covered, as a sign of mourning, became mingled with bis food, and bis tears fell into bis drink. Tbis last word is, in Hebrew, of tbe plural number, drinks or heve: ages^ analogous to victuals as a simple synonyme oi food. As an opposite example of the same idiomatic difference, tbe word translated ashes is a singular in Hebrew. Tbe whole verse is a strong poetical description of constant and extreme distress.

11 (10.) Because of thine indignation and thy wrath; for thou hast taken me up and cast me away. The first clause describes bis suffering as tbe fruit of God's displeasure. See above, on Ps. xc. 7. Tbe antithesis presented in tbe common version of tbe last clause (lifted me itp and cast me down) does not seem to be tbe sense of the original, in which there is probably allusion to tbe figure of a storm or whirlwind catching things up and blowing them away. The Prayer Book version of the first verb {taken me up) is more exact.

12 (ll.j My days (are) like a shadow inclined., and I (myself) like the grass wither. An inclined shadow is an unusual and obscure expression, but seems to mean a shadow verging towards its disappearance, ready to vanish away. The double or reflexive pronoun {I myself) in the translation of the last clause is necessary to convey tbe full force of the Hebrew pronoun, which is seldom expressed, except when it is meant to be emphatic. 1 wither J am withering, or about to wither.

13 (12.) And thou, Jehovah, to eternity shall sit, and thy memory (shall endure) to generation and generation. Here again the pronoun is emphatic, and exhibits a strong contrast between God's eternity and human frailty. While I wither like tbe grass, thou endurest forever, and not only so, but reignest, sittest on the throne. See above, on Ps. ix. 8(7.) xxix. 10. Iv. 20 (19.) The word memory seems here to be employed for tbe sake of the anti- 12 PSALM   Cn. thesis which it implies While I perish and am utterly forgotten, thy existence and thy memory shall last forever. It may, however, have the same sense as in Ps. xxx. 5 (4), namely, thQ divine perfection, associated in our memory with the name of God. Thou shalt not only reign forever, but be worthy, as an infinitely perfect being, so to do.

<!-- PAGE 19 -->
14 (13.) Thou wilt arise J wilt have mercy upon Zion, when (it is) time to favour her, ivhen the set time is come. The pronoun is again emphatic. Thou, the God thus glorious and immutable, wilt certainly arise from this apparent inaction, and have mercy or compassion on thy people, when the time fixed in thy eteri.al purpose is arrived. The sense of when^ thus given to the Hebrew particle ("13), although less usual, is sometimes absolutely necessary, and is therefore admissible in this case, where it suits the sense much better than the ordinary sense of for. Or the one may be resolved into the other, by explaining the whole thus: thou wilt certainly arise and have compassion upon Zion, at the proper time, FOR there is a time fixed at which thou dost design to favour her. For the meaning of the word translated set time^ see above, on Ps. Ixxv. 3 (2.)

15 (14.) When thy servants love her stones, and her dust regaid with favour. Both verbs in Hebrew mean to favour, or more strongly, to delight in, to take pleasure in. See above, Ps. Ixii. 5 (4.) Ixxxv. 2 (1.) Stones and dust are here put for ruins or rubbish, as in Neh. iii. 34 (iv. 2.) iv. 4 (10.) The verse may be understood as a condition or a premonition of her restoration, that before it takes place, God will fill his servants with affectionate concern for her desolate condition. The same sense may be obtained without departing from the usual sense of the particle. Thou wilt have mercy upon Zion, fop^ thy servants already look: with interest and strong desire on her ruins, a sure sign of the approaching restoration. *

<!-- PAGE 20 -->
16 (15.) And nations shall fear the name of Jehovah^ and all •tings 'if the, earth thy glory. The impression of awe, unavoidably produced by these exhibitions of Jehovah's attributes, shall not be limited to Israel but extend to other nations, and even kings shall vie with each other in their reverential admiration of his regal honours.    Compare the similar expressions of Isaiah (lix. 19.)

17 (16.) Because Jehovah has hidlt Zion ; he has been seen in his glory. These are not 'praeterita 'projphetica., describing future events as past; nor are they to be taken as mere presents, but aa denoting a relative past, dependent on the futures of the verse preceding. The nations and their kings are to fear because Jehovah has built (i. e. will then have built) Zion. Still another construction may seem possible, viz. ' when J^,hovah has built Zion, he shall be seen in his glory.' But in this case, Hebrew usage would require the last verb, if not both, to ??aTe the future form

18 (17.) He has turned unto thejprayer of the destitute^ and has not despised their prayer. This verse continues to assign the reason why the nations and their kings will be struck with awe, viz. because this great and glorious God has turned round, as it were, and listened to the prayer of the destitute and granted their petition. The word tran-slated destitute occurs only here and in Jer. xvii. 6 ; but from its etymological affinities and its intensivo form, appears to mean stark naked, and then figuratively, strip}>ed oi every thing, impoverished, entirely destitute.

19 (18.) This shall be ivriiten for an after generation^ (Mid a people (yet to be) created shall praise Jah. This fulfilment of Crod'a promise and illustration of his attributes is left on record for the learning or instruction of posterity. Compare 1 Cor. x. 11. An after generation^ as in Ps. xlviii. 14 (13.) Ixxviii. 4. Equivalent in meaning, but abridged in form, is the expression in ^he passage 14 PSALM   Cn. upon whicli these are founded, Ps. xxii. 31 (30.) See also Ps Ixxi. IS. Created may have the force of a gerundive, as the passive particle often has in Hebrew ; or it may mean {then) created {hnt not now.) See above, on Ps. xxii. 32 (31.) As the verb (k^^) create is applied only to divine acts, its use here seems to indicate that what is meant is not merely a future generation, a race yet to come into existence, but a people in the strict sense, an organized body to be formed hereafter by sovereign authority and almighty power. Shall praise Jah^ recognize Jehovah as possessing and as being all that is denoted by his name.

<!-- PAGE 21 -->
20 (19.) For he has leaned from the high-place of his holiness ; Jehovah from heaven to earth has looked. The first word may also be translated that., and the verse bo understood as an amplification of the pronoun this at the beginning of v. 19 (IS.) This is what shall be written for a future generation; this is what they shall praise Jah for; viz. that he has looked, etc. To avoid the repetition of the English verb, as well as to add life to the description, the Hebrew verb is here represented by what seems to be its primary meaning. See above on Ps. xiv. 2. Ixxxv. 12 (11), and compare Deut. xxvi. 15.

21 (20.) To hear the groaning of the prisoner.^ to loose the sons of mortality. The construction is continued from the foregoing verse, and the design of God's thus looking down is stated. The word translated groaning is almost peculiar to the psalms of David, and according to its etymology properly denotes sufifocation. To loose., literally to cpen^ sometimes applied to the opening of a dress for the purpose of removing it, as in Ps. xxx. 12 (11) ; then to the loosening of chains, as in Ps. cxvi. 16 ; then to the deliverance of the prisoner himself. Sons of mortality or deathj i. e. those doomed to die.    See above, on Ps. Ixxix. 11.

22 (21.) To rccoiuit in Ziun the name of Jehovah dni his praise PSALM   CI I. 15 in Jerusalem. This, according to the laws of Hebrew syntax, doos not necessarily denote an act of God himself, as the similar construction in the preceding verse does, but may have a vaguer sense equivalent to saying, that his name may be declared in Zion To recount God's name is to recount the mighty deeds which constitute it, and the celebration of which constitutes his praise. Zion is still represented as the great scene of Jehovah's triumphs^ not however as the capital of Israel or Judah merely, but as the radiating centre of religious light and influence to all the earth.

<!-- PAGE 22 -->
23 (22.) In the gathering of ;peojplcs together, and kingdoms to serve Jehovah. This verse is necessary to complete and qualify the sense of that before it. God has looked down from heaven to deliver his people and receive their praise, not in their secluded, insulated state, but in their glorious reunion with the converted nations. The first verb is a passive infinitive in Hebrew, in their being gathered. The preposition in relates both to the time and to the act of convocation. To serve Jehovah, not only as a King, but as a God, to be both his subject and his worshipper. Com pare Ps. ii. 11.

24 (23.) He has humbled in the tvay his strength; he has shortened my days. The Psalmist here resumes the tone of complaint, but only for a moment, and as an introduction to what follows. Humbled, weakened, or afflicted. In or by the ivay of his providential guidance, as distinguished from the glorious end to which it led. His strength and 7?iy days seem clearly to refer to the same person. To avoid this harsh enallage, the masoretic critics changed a single letter, and for (iri3) his strength read ("^H^) my strength, which, though adopted in most versions, is an obvious evasion of a supposed difficulty. With the last' clause compare Ps. Ixxxix. 46 (45.) See also Ps. /v. 24 (23.)

25 (24.)  / loill say, Oh my God, take me not up in the half 16 Pf3.\A,^^   CII. of my days ; through generation jf generations (are) thy ycar%. Take up, cause to ascend, i. o. a.N some suppose, like smoke, which is very forced and far-fetched. Others make it simply mean to take away, which gives a good sense, but is not sufficiently eustained by usage. Better than eliivir is the supposition that death or removal out of life is here described by a figure corresponding to the actual departure of Enoc^i and Elijah. See G-en. V. 24. 2 Kings ii. 1, 3, 5, 10, 11. In the half (or midst) of my days ; see above, on Ps. Iv. 24 (23), and compare Isai. xxxviii. 10. Generation of generations^ i. e. all generations, as in Ps. Ixxii. 5. Isai. li. 8. He prays that God, whose yearii are endless, would not, as it were, grudge the few days granted to ihii creatures. See above, on Ps. xxxix. 6 (5.)

<!-- PAGE 23 -->
2Q (25.) At first thou the earth didst found^ and the work of thy hands (are) the heavens. The phrase at the beginning means originally to the face., and then hefore., 'as an adverb both of time and place ; but this would be ambiguous here, since it might be understood as a conjunction, "before thou didst found the earthy expressing the same idea as in Ps. xc. 2. It here means long ago, of old, in the beginning. With the last clause compare Ps. viii. 4 (3.) xix. 2(1.) xxxiii. 6. God's creative power is here added to his eternity, in order to enhance the contrast between his infinity and man's littleness, as a reason for compassion to the latter.

27 (26.) They shall perish and thou shalt stand, a'Tid all of them like a garment shall wear out, like a dress shalt thou change them and they shall change. The contrast is brought out a? pointedly as possible in Hebrew, by the insertion of the pronouns they and thou., neither of which is grammatically necessary to the expression of the meaning. Stand.^ stand fast, endure, remain, continue. All of them., without exception, even the noblest of God's works, ehall at least los? their present form, and in that sense perish, a PSALM   CI I. V7 sense which may be still more readily put upon the parallel Terb pass away or change. The twofold usage of the English verb, as active and neuter, or transitive and intransitive, makes it an appropriate representative of the primitive and derivative forms of the Hebrew verb (tj^n). The corresponding verb, in the second member of the sentence, means not only to wax old., but, as the necessary consequence, to wear out. See above on Ps. xxxii. 3, and compare Ps. xlix. 15 (14.)

<!-- PAGE 24 -->
28 (27.) And Thou (art) He—and thy years shall not hi finished. The construction of the first clause is disputed. Some read it, Thoio thyself and thy years shall not end. Others, Thou art the same., giving ^^X\ the same sense with the Greek o ai'rdjj which is actually used here to translate it in the Septuagint. In favour of the version first above given, is its agreement with the usage of the Hebrew words, with \hQ analogy of Deut. xxxii. 39 and Isai. xliii. 10, and with the context here. The meaning then is, Thou art the Unchangeable One just described. Or, it is Thou, and nothing else, that shall thus endure. Be finished., spent, consumed, as the Hebrew word invariably means. What is elsewhere literally said of the violent destruction of human life is here transferred to the lapse of time.

29 (28.) The sons of t-hy servants shall abidej and their seed before thee shall be established. This might also be translated aa a prayer, let the sons of thy servants contiriue, which is really included even in the prediction. Before thee, as in Gren. xvii. 1. Ps. Ixxxix. 37 (36.) Be established, as in Ps. Ixxxix. 38 (37.) ci. 7. With this conclusion of the whole psalm compare Ps Ixix 36, 37 (35, 36.) xc. 16, 17. PSALM   CIII.

<!-- PAGE 25 -->
The Psalmist calls upon himself to praise God for personal favours already experienced, vs. 1-5. From these he rises, in the body of the psalm, to the contemplation of Grod's attributes. in themselves considered, and as manifested in his dealings with his people, vs. 6-19. He concludes as he began, with an exhortation to bless God, no longer addressed merely to himself, but to all creatures, vs. 20-22. According to the exegetical hypothesis already mentioned, this is the song of mercy and judgment promised in Ps. ci. 1. The arguments in favour of this theory have been already stated. The principal objection to it, and that by no means a conclusive one, is the want of unison and even concord, as to tone and spirit, between the psalm before us and the two preceding it. Be this as it may, the psalm before us is a complete and finished composition, being one of the most simple and yet regular in structure that the book contains. This has contributed, with other obvious peculiarities, to make it a favourite vehicle of thankful praise among the pious of all ages.

1. By David. Bless, oh my soul, Jehovah, and all within me (bless) his holy name! The attempts which have been made by modern critics to discredit the inscription in the first clause chiefly consist in representing the many imitations and allusions to this noble composition in the later scriptures as a cento of citatioDS from those scriptures by the writer of the psalm itself, a preposterous inversion of the laws of evidence to which the ncologica? FSALM   cm. 1& critics are especially addicted, and by which any thing and ever^ thing can be disproved or proved at pleasure. Bless, when applied to God, means to praise, but with a strong implication of devout affection. By calling on his soul to do this, he acknowledges his own obligation, not only to praise God, but to praise him cordially, with all the heart, according to the solemn requisition of the Law (Deut. vi. 5), to which there is perhaps a reference in all such cases. See above, on Ps. iii. 3 (2.) The parallel expression, all loithin me, is the plural form of one repeatedly used elsewhere and denoting the inside of any thing, and more especially of man, his mind or heart, as distinguished from his mere professions or external acts. See above, on Ps. v. 10 (9.) xlix. 12 (11.) The literal translation of the form here used is my insides or inner parts, the strong and comprehensive meaning of the plural being further enhanced by the addition of all, as if to preclude exception and reserve, and comprehend within the scope of the address all the powers and affections. His name of holiness (or holy name), i. e. the revelation of his infinite perfections.    See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) xxii. 4 (3.)

<!-- PAGE 26 -->
2. Bless, oh my soul, Jehovah, and forget not all his dealings. The positive exhortation is repeated as a kind of foil to the negative one following, in which there seems to be allusion to the frequent admonition in the Law to Israel, not to forget the Lord who brought him up out of the land of Egypt. See Deut. vi. 12viii. 11, 14. The last word in the verse before us is the passive participle of a verb which means to treat, and commonly to treat well. See above on Ps. vii. 5 (4.j The idea here conveyed is that of treatment, determined by the context to be kind and gracious treatment. The latitude of meaning and the plural form are both represented in the English word dealings, which, though susceptible of either application can, in this connection^ only hava a good one.

<!-- PAGE 27 -->
3. Forgiving ill thy guilty healing all thy sicknesses. The participles are to be grammatically construed with Jehovah, as tho object of the praise required, and assign a reason for the requisition, furnished by the personal experience of the soul itself. The origmal expression is still more definite, each participle having the article prefixed, the (one) forgiving, the (one) healing. See a similar construction carried out still further in Ps. xviii. 33-35 (32-34), 48-51 (47-50.) The last word in the verse is an unusual one borrowed from Deut. xxix. 21, where sicknesses are joined with plagues or strokes, to signify calamities considered as •>enal inflictions. The same idea is expressed in other words, Ex. xvi. 26. The relation of the clauses, in the verse before us, may be that of cause and efiect. Forgiving all thy guilt ani thereby removing all the misery occasioned by it.

4. Redeeming from the grave thy life, crowning thee (with) mercy and compassions. The combination of the article and participle is the same as in v. 3, the (one) redeeming, the (one) crowning. The continuation of the sentence in this form keeps the attention fixed upon the reasons for which, or the characters in which, the Lord is to be praised. As if he had said, Bless him as the one forgiving thee and healing thee, redeeming thee and crowning thee. Redeeming means delivering, but with a strong implication of cost and risk. For the twofold sense of (Cind) the word translated grave, see above, on Ps. xvi. 10, and compare Ps. XXX. 10 (9.) The peculiar form of the possessive pronoun, in this verse and the one before it, has been represented as a proof of later date, but really belongs to the dialect of poetry_ from which, in all languages, certain expressions are continually passing into that of common life, so that what in one age is poetical is in the next colloquial, and seems therefore to belong to the later period and to show the recent date of any composition ii^ which it occurs. The familiar use of such words as oftentimes, perchance, etc. in our own dny may thus be used hereafter to prove the writings of our older poets spurious. The figure of crownings which occurs above in Ps. Ixv. 12 (11), suggests the ideas of dignity and beauty, while the absence of merit in the object, and the sovereign freeness of the gift, are indicated by making the crown itself a crown of mercy and compassio7is. The last word in Hebrew is expressive of the warmest and tenderest affections. See above, on Ps. xviii. 2 (1.) xxv. 6. xl. 12 (11.)

<!-- PAGE 28 -->
5. Filling with good thy soul—(then) is renewed, like the eagle,^ thy youth. The peculiar construction of the two preceding verse? is continued through the first clause of the one before us, and then suddenly abandoned. Filling, the {one) filling, in the sense of satisfying or abundantly supplying, but without the accessory notion of satiety. See above, on Ps. Ixxxi. 17 (16.) xci. 16 With good, literally the good, by way of eminence, the chief good or the real good. Thy soul is not a literal translation of the Hebrew term, which, in every other case where it occurs, means ornament or decoration. See for example Ps. xxxii. 9 (8.) The translations mouth, life, etc. are gratuitous conjectures from the context. The best explanation is that furnished by the analogous word (TiiS") honour, glory, which is sometimes applied to the soul as the nobler part of man. See above, on Ps. xvi. 9. This explanation is confirmed by the frequent combination of the noun tout and the verb to satisfy. See above, Ps. Ixiii. 6 (5), and below, Ps. cvii. 9, and compare Isai. Iviii. 11. It is also sanctioned by the ancient versions ; for Jilthough the Targum makes it mean old age, a palpable conjecture, the Septuagint and Yulgate have desire (eittdvfAiav^ dcsiderium), a frequent sense of (llfci) soul in Hebrew, and Jerome translates it literally, or?^<^mentum. The word then is introduced into the translation of the second clause, in order to retain the Hebrew collocation, which is not without its emphasis. Is renewed, or retaining the reflexive form of the original, renzws itself. The supposed allusion in thi? clause to a fabulous or real renovation of the eagle in its old age. 22 PSALM   CI II. rests upon a misconception of the language, as the only point of comparison with the eagle is its strength and vigour, as in 2 Sam. i. 23. Isai. xl. 31, and the whole verse may be paraphrased as follows. ^ So completely does his bounty feed thy strength, that even in old age thou growest young again, and soarest like an eagle.'

<!-- PAGE 29 -->
6. Doing righteousnesses (is) Jehovah^ and judgments for all oppressed. Thus far the reasons urged for praising God were personal, i. G. derived from individual experience. With these, from the very constitution of our nature, all our grateful exercises must begin. But if genuine they do not stop there, as the Psalmist, at this point, ascends from private causes of thanksgiving to more general views of Grod's administration, as a basis for the universal call with which the psalm concludes. The connection here may thus be stated. ' Such have been the Lord's compassions to myself, but these are only samples of his goodness. He is not only merciful to me, but to all who are oppressed, and to deliver whom he executes his judgments.' There is no contrast here intended between mercy and justice, with respect to different objects of the Lord's compassion. The meaning is, ihat man's injustice is redressed by God's mercy. The redemption of his people is often represented as coincident wtth the condign punishment of their oppressors. Compare my note on Isai. i. 27. Doings i e. practising in general, and executing in particular cases. The participle {doing) signifies habitual and constant action ; the plural form (righteousnesses) completeness and variety, adapted to all possible emergencies. Judgments^ as usual, denotes judicial acts, as dLs tinguished from mere attributes or principles.

7. He makes known his ways to Moses^ to the children of Israel his (mighty) deeds. The general statement of the fact in the preceding verse is now followed by the great historical example furnished in Jehovah's dealings with his people.    This serves, P S A L M   c: 111. 23 not only to illustrate what was said before, but to show that it was not a mere vague declaration of what God will do te all men, but a definite assertion of his purpose and his practice with respect to his own people. All the oppressed^ to whom he grants or promises deliverance, are not mankind in general, without distinction or exception, but his own people when in that condition The first clause contains an obvious allusion to the prayer of Moses, as recorded by himself, Ex. xxxiii. 13, from which passage it appears, that the ways of Grod, which he desired to know, were his modes of dealing with his people, or the com-se of his dispensations towards them. See above, on Ps. xxv. 4. Ixvii. 3 (2.) The knowledge thus imparted was experimental or afforded by experience. The parallelism between Moses and the Children of Israel shews that the latter were represented by the former. The last Hebrew word is one constantly applied to God's exploits or mighty deeds in behalf of Israel. See above, on Ps. ix. 12 (11.) Ixxviii. 11.

<!-- PAGE 30 -->
8. Compassionate and gracious (is) Jehovah^ slow to ange?, and rich in mercy. See above, on Ps. Ixxvii. 10 (9.) Ixxviii. 38. Ixxxvi. 15, in all which cases, as in this, the terms of the description are borrowed from Ex. xxxiv. 6. There is here an evident progression in the thought. Not only is God good to me, but to all his people in distress; not only did he prove this to Moses and to Israel by saving them from Pharoah and their other enemies, but by bearing with their own offences. The previous context might have seemed to concede innocence, if not merit, to God's people, as the object of his kind regard; but they are here exhibited as sinners, needing his forbearance and forgiveness.

9. ]Yot to perpetuity will he strive^ and not to eternity retain (his anger.J This of course implies that he is sometimes angry, even with his people, and sometimes strives in opposition to their drivings against him.    "But as he is always in the right, and they 24 PSALM   CI II. * are always in tlie wrong, it is a signal proof of the di\^ine compassion, that he does not strive and is not wroth forever. The first clause is closely copied by Isaiah (Ivii. 16.) The second is itself derived from Lev. xix. 18, where we find a verb meaning to retain or reserve used absolutely in the sense of harbouring a grudge or cherishing a secret spite. This remarkable form of expression is copied in the case before us and in Nah. i. 2. Jer iii. 5, 12. The original passage is a prohibition, in obeying which the Lord, as it were, here sets his people an example. Compare Matt. V. 48. 1 Cor. xi. 1. Eph. v. 1.

<!-- PAGE 31 -->
10. Not according to our sins has he done to us, and not according to onr iniquities has he dealt with us. That the people stood in need of the divine forbearance, is now still more distinctly intimated. The last verb is the one of which the narticiple occurs in v. 2, and might here be rendered, with still closer aaherence to the strict sense of the Hebrew preposition, /ms ke beitowed upon us. See the same construction in the Hebrew of Ps. xiii. 6. cxvi. 7. cxlii. 8 (7.) The past tense has reference to the previous history of Israel as a nation, but involves the statement of a general truth. At the end of the verse, we may suppose it to be tacitly added : as he might have done, not only iv strict justice, but in execution of his express threatening. Lev. xxvi. 21.

11, For as the heavens are high above the earthy mighty is his mercy above those that fear him. The Hebrew preposition is the bame in both clauses, and cannot be varied in translation without weakening the sentence. In the last clause it suggests the ideaa of descent from above, superior power, and protection, in addition to that of mere relation or direction, which is all that is conveyed by the translation to or t^ioards. The force of the original is likewise impaired by substituting great for strong or mghiy.    The idea meant to be conveyed is  not that of mp.ro extent but of efficiency. The literal meaning of the first words is, like the height of the,heavens, or like their heing high. His fearers, or tho&e fearing him, is a common description of the righteous or God's people, who are more particularly characterked in v. 18.

<!-- PAGE 32 -->
12. As far as the east is from the west, he hath jput far from us our transgressions. The form of expression at the beginning is the same as in v. 11, like the distance of the east, or like its heiiig far. The Hebrew words for east and west, according to tlieir etymology, denote the place of sunrise and the place of evening. Put far from us, as no longer having anything to do with us, a figure which suggests the idea both of pardon and renewal, justification and sanctification.

13. As a father has compassion on (his) children, Jehovah has compassion on his fearers. The compound phrase, Jms compassion^ is here substituted for the simple verb pity, in order to retain the preposition on, which follows it in Hebrew, and also because the plural form compassions was necessarily employed in v. 4 to translate the cognate noun. The Hebrew verb is peculiarly appropriate in speaking of parental love. See above, on Ps. xviii. 2 (1.) The preterite forms represent the fact alleged as one already known and well attested by experience.

14. For he knows our frame, mindful that dust (are) we. Tho fragility of man is here again assigned as a ground of the divino compassion. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 39. Ixxxix. 48 (47.) Frame, formation, constitution, or as we say familiarly in Eng lish, our make, our build. The Hebrew noun is derived from tho verb used in Ps. xciv. 9, and may therefore be intended to suggest the same idea that is there expressed. He who formed us knows of course how we are formed. The same noun is applied to the moral constitution, Gen. vi. 5, viii. 21, Deut. xxxi. 21.    The word 26 PSALM   CII.I. translated mindful is, in form, a passive participle, (^^IDT] meaning -emcmhercd^ but equivalent in use to tbe active, remembering, or the verbal adjective mindful^ just as the like form (nps) trusted is equivalent to truUing^ Ps. cxii. 7, the English rejoiced to rtjoicing, etc. We are dust, i. e. made of it, and tending to it Compare Gen. ii. 7, iii. 19, Ps. xc. 3.

<!-- PAGE 33 -->
15. (As for) man, Ms days (are) like the grass ; like the blossom of the field, so he blossoms. As the preceding verse expresses the fragility of man by referring to his origin and end, so this verse does the same by a familiar but beautiful comparison, borrowed from Ps. xc. 6, and repeated in Isai. xl. 6—8. Job xiv. 2. The very name here given to the race is one denoting fi-ailty and infirmity.    See above, on Ps. viii. 5 (4.)

16. For a breath passes over him and he is not, and no more shall his place know him. The pronouns may, with equal grammatical correctness, be referred to the grass and rendered it, its. The primary meaning of the first noun {breath) is, in this connection, stronger than the secondary (icind.) The wind may bo a whirlwind; but to say that a mere breath is sufficient to de stroy one is the strongest possible expression of fragility. That the wind is called the breath of God, as the thunder is his voice, is a striking and poetical but needless supposition. He is not or 710 more, there is none of him, no such thing or person. See above, on Ps. xxxvii. 10. With the first clause compare Isai. xl. 7 ; with the second. Job vii. 10. The last verb means to recognize or know again, as in Ps. cxlii. 5 (4), and the whole clause, that death makes men strangers to the objects with which they have been most familiar

17. And the mercy of Jehovah (is) from eternity even to eternity upon those fearing him, and his righteousness to children^ children.    Having carried the description of man's frailty to th«» furthest point, the Psalmist suddenly contrasts with it God's everlasting mercy. The use of the simple copulative and^ in such a marked antithesis, where hut might to us seem indispensable, is one of the most strikiiw and familiar'Hebrew idioms. Ufoii those, fearing him suggests the idea of a gift from above To children'^s children simply means given (or belonging^ to them Unless we make the last clause a threatening of hereditary vengeance to the wicked, his righteousness can only mean his rectitude, including his veracity and faithfulness in exercising covenanted mercy.     Childrenh children^ literally, sons of sons.

<!-- PAGE 34 -->
18. To the keepers of his covenant, and to the rememberers of his laws, to do them. This is the necessary qualification of a promise which might otherwise have seemed too absolute. Even to the descendants of those fearing him the promise availed nothing, unless they themselves were faithful to his covenant and obedient to his law. The last words {to do thevi) show that the remem brance of the law required was not merely intellectual but practi cal and tending to obedience.

19. Jehovah in the heavens has fixed his throne, and his Jangdom over all rules. Not only is he infinitely merciful and faithful, but a universal and almighty sovereign, no less able than willing to fulfil his promises and execute his purposes of mercy. The word translated fixed, like its English representative, suggests the two ideas of preparing and establishing. The same combination with throne occurs above, Ps. ix. 8 (7.) See also Ps. xi. 4. xlvii. 9 (8.) Over all; the original expression is still stronger, over the whole, the universe, to nuv. The same phrase is applied to the entire human race, Ps. xiv. 3. The past tense of the last verb represents this unlimited dominion as already established or revealed. The future would have made its ulterior continuance the prominent idea.

<!-- PAGE 35 -->
20. Bless Jehovah^ ye his angels, mighty in stiength, doing his inord, (so as) to listen to the voice of his word. Having finished his assertion of God's claims to universal praise, the Psalmist resumes the tone of exhortation with which he began. His appeal, however, is no longer to his own soul, but to the hosts of heaven, the noblest of God's creatures, the highest order of finite intelligences. Mighty in strength, more exactly, mighty (ones) of strength, or, as the first word is applied as a substantive to warriors or conquerors, heroes of strength or mighty heroes. See above, on Ps. xxiv. 8. Ixxviii. 25. The construction in the last clause is obscure. The infinitive may here have the force of a gerund, audicndo, auscultando, by listening to the voice of his word, or, as in Ps. Ixxviii. 18, it may denote the extent or the effect of their obedience, so as to hearken, or so that they hearken, \. e. listen for the faintest intimation of his will. The expression hearken to his voice, as thus applied, is a Mosaic one. See Deut. xxvi. 17. XXX. 20.

21. Bless Jehovah, ye his hosts, his mi7iisters, the doers of kit will. As the word hosts is applied both to the angels and the heavenly bodies (see above, on Ps. xxiv. 10), some interpreters, in order to relieve this verse of a tautology, suppose it to relate to the heavenly hosts in one sense, as the preceding verse does in another. In the same way they account for the change of expression in the last clause. Only intelligent creatures can be literally said to listen for God's word and to obey it; but even the inanimate creation may be said, without a metaphor, to execute his will.    This last phrase occurs also in Ps. xl. 9 (8.)

22. Bless ye Jehovah, all his works, in all places of his realm ; bless thou, oh my soul, Jehovah ! The angels and heavenly bodies, with men and every other creature, are now slimmed up in the comprehensive phrase, aZZ his works, i. e. all that he has made, all creatures,  and  invited to bless God, which invitation   the ALM  CIV. 29 Psalmist then addresses once more to himself, and thus, by a beautiful transition, brings us back to the point from which we started.
