<!-- psalm 105 | vol 3 | scan pages 53-67 -->

<!-- PAGE 53 -->
This, like the Seventy-Eighth, is a historical psaim, recounting God's ancient dealings with his people, especially in Egypt. The practical design of the commemoration is not to bring the people to repentance, as in the case referred to, but to excite their hopes of an analogous deliverance.    According to a theory already mentioned, this is the second member of a trilogy, added to one of older date (Ps. ci--ciii) during the time of the captivity. It differs from the psalm before it in deriving from his* tory the same consolation which is there derived from nature. After the introduction, vs. 1—7, the arrangement is simply chrono logical, beginning with the promise to Abraham, and ending with the conquest of Canaan, vs. 8—44. The first fifteen verses of this psalm are found in 1 Chron. xvi, combined with Ps. xcvi and three verses of Ps. cvi.    See above, on Ps. xcvi. 1.

<!-- PAGE 54 -->
1. Give thanks unto Jehovah^ call upon his name^ maJce known among the nations his exploits. The original meaning of the second phrase is, call {him) by his na7?ie^ i. e. give him the descriptive title most expressive of his divine perfections; or more specifically, call him by his name Jehovah, i. e. ascribe to him the attributes which it denotes, to wit, eternity and self-existence, together with that covenant relation to his people, which though not denoted by the name was constantly associated with it, and therefore necessarily suggested by it. The meaning of the next phrase is obscured, if not entirely concealed, in the common version, among the people. The plural form and sense of the original expression are essential to the writer's purpose, which is to vlorify the Grod of Israel among all nations. See above, on Ps. xviii. 50 (49.) Ivii. 10 (9.) For the meaning of the last word, see above, on Ps. ciii. 7.

2. Sing to him., play to him., muse on all his wondrous deeds. The exhortation seems to be addressed to the Gentiles, who are called uDon to join in the praises and to share the blessings of the chosen people. For the meaning of the last verb, see above, on Ps. civ. 34.

3. Glory in his holy name! Glad shall be the heart of those wh(\ ^eek Jehovah.    Congratulate yourselves that you possess a right and interest in the favour of so glorious a Being. The last clause presents as an inducement, that to seek the favour of this Grod is a source, and by implication the only source, of joy and happiness.    Compare Ps. xxxiv. 3 (2.) xl. 17 (16.) Ixix. 7 (6.)

<!-- PAGE 55 -->
4 SeeJc Jehovah and his strength^ seek his face evermore. The Hebrew verbs, although synonymous, are not identical. And his strength^ the protection secured by his almighty power. Sec' him, not as a finite being, but as the omnipotent Jehovah, the source, as well as the possessor, of all strength. Seek his face,, not merely his presence, but his countenance, his favourable look r aspect. With the several expressions of this verse compare Ps. ix. 11 (10.) X. 4. xiv. 2. xxiv. 6. xxxiv. 5 (4 ) Ixi. 4 (3.) Ixii. 8 (7.) Ixiii. 3 (2.) Ixviii. 35 (34) xcvi. 7.

5. Remember his ivondroits dtids lohich he did, his miracles and the judgments of his mouth. They are exhorted not to forget them, as Israel is charged with doing, Ps. Ixxviii. 11. Miracles^ prodigies or wonders, proofs of divine power. There is no need of identifying these with the judgments of his mouth., which include his laws and the sentences pronounced upon his enemies. The latter is probably the prominent idea as best suited to this context.

6. Ye seed of Abraham his servant., ye sons of Jacob., his chosen {oTies.) Descendants of the patriarchs, and therefore heirs of the patriarchal promises. The common version of the last phrase {his chosen)., though exact, conveys a wrong idea, as it seems to make chosen an epithet of Jacob., which would also seem to \jQ required by the parallelism ; but the Hebrew word is plural and fleseribes the object of address as the church or chosen people. Compare Isai. Ixv. 9. Abraham is called the Servant of God, in an emphatic sense, as being his chosen instrument and confidential agent.    See above, on Ps. xviii. 1, and compare Ps. xc   1     The parallel passage (1 Chr. xvi. 13) has Israel his servant.

<!-- PAGE 56 -->
7. He is Jehovah our God ; in all tht earth (are) his judgments. His covenant relations are with us the seed of Abraham ; but the proofs of his existence and vindicatory justice are common to all nations. This whole introduction seems intended to dispose both Jews and Gentiles to the praise of God.

8. He remembered forever his covenant^ the word he command-id for a thousand generations. There is here a kind of antithetical allusion to the exhortation in v. 5. They should remember what he did, since he remembers what he promised. What he has done involves a pledge of what he will do. He has remembered (and will remember) his covenant to eternity. Tht word is the word of promise. He is said to have commanded it, partly because his promise is conditional and annexed to his coaimandmont, and for that reason called a covenant; partly because all that God says must of necessity be said with authority, so that even his promises partake of the nature of commands. The last phrase, a thousand generations., is Mosaic. See Deut. vii. 9, and compare Ex. XX. 6.

9. Which he ratified with Abraham., and his oath to Isaac. The sentence is continued from the foregoing verse. Ratified, literally cut; see above, on Ps. 1. 5. His oath (which he sware) to Isaac, or, his oath for (the benefit of) Isaac. The distinction, if any be intended, is that the covenant was formally made only with Abraham, and merely sanctioned or confirmed by oatli to his successors. See Gen. xv. 18. xxvi. 3. xxviii. 13. His oath is governed by remembered in v. 8. Compare Ps. Ixxxix. 28, 34 (27, 33.)

10. And confirmed it to Jacob for a statute, to Israel (foi \ an everlasting covenant. Confirmed it., literally, made (or let) it stand, instead of suffering it to expire with the person to whom it was originally given. A statute^ in the wide sense of a permanent arrangement, a perpetual constitution, or, as it is called in the last clause, a compact of eternity^ an everlasting covenant. See Gen. xxviii. 13. xxxv. 12.

<!-- PAGE 57 -->
11 Sayings To thee will I give the land of Canaan^ as the 'portion of your heritage. The subject or substance of the promise is now more distinctly stated. The word translated portion primarily means a line., especially a measuring line., and then what is measured by it, to wit, a piece of land, a lot of ground. This was not to be given to the patriarchs in person, but to their descendants, as the portion of their heritage or their hereditary portion. The plural your may refer, however, to the patriarchs themselves, as the promise was repeated to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

12. When as yet they could be numbered—very few, and Strang er$ in it. The first clause involves an antithetical allusion to the promise, afterwards fulfilled, that they should be innumerable as the stars, or as the sand upon the shore, Gen. xxii. 17. The form of the original is highly idiomatic, vi their being men of number., like a little., or like littleness itself. See above, on Ps. Ixxiii. 2, and compare Isai. i. 9. Strangen, sojourners, living on the lands of others, at their will, or by their sufferance. See above, on Ps. xxxix. 13 (12.) In it, the land of Canaan, mentioned in the preceding verse. The whole verse qualifies the previous account of the patriarchal covenant, which was not made with Israel when already a great nation, but with their ancestors when few in number and without a settled home. The parallel passage (1 Chron. xvi. 19) has when ye wen. See Gen xxxiv. 30, and compare Deut. xxxiii. 6. Isai. x. If

<!-- PAGE 58 -->
13. And they went about from nation to nation^ from kingdom to another people. This may be rega.rded as in contrast with v. 12, and {yet) they ucnt about, notwithstanding their small number and their being strangers. Or vs. 12, 13, may be the protasis of the sentence, and V. 14 its apodosis. ' When they were few and strangers, and went from nation to nation, he let no man, etc' This verse describes the characteristic feature in the condition of the chosen people, during the patriarchal period of their history, namely, their migratory intercourse with various nations. These are mentioned in the first clause as distinct races, in the last as distinct states or bodies politic. Where we might have expected from kingdom to kingdom, the ear is somewhat disappointed by the phrase/ro/^i kingdom to another people, which may have been intended to distinguish the Egyptian and other monarchies from the more democratical or patriarchal institutions of the Arabians and other nations. Thty went about seems to be the force of the reflexive or frequentative verb, as distinguished from that of the primitive, they went. See above, on Ps. xxvi. 3. xxxv. 14. ci. 2, and compare Gen. v. 22. xvii. 1. xxiv. 6, 9, 40. xlviii. 15.

14. He suffered no man to oppress them, and reproved, for their sake, kings. The precise sense of the first clause is, he suffered not man (or men in general) to oppress them. The protection of the patriarchs is certainly one of the most striking facts in sacred history. The kings mentioned in the last clause are the kings of Egypt and Gerar (Gen. xii. 17. xx. 3), not without reference perhaps to those mentioned in Gren. xiv. 1.

15. Touch not mine anointed {ones), and to my prophets do no harm. These are the words of God himself, and are designated as such, in the English Bible, by supplying the word sayiu^ which is expressed in the analogous case, v. 11. Touch not, ar in Gen. xxvi. 11,29. In the Old Testament, unction is the symbol of spiritual gifts, and especially of those imparted to the PSALM   CV. great theocratical offices. See above, on Ps. ii. 2. From the case of Elisba (1 Kings xix. 16) it would seem that prophets were anointed when inducted into office. The patriarchs are here called jirophcls in the proper sense of the term, as denoting men inspired of God, and admitted to confidential intercourse with him. The allusion here is to Gren. xx. 7, where God says to Abimelech of Abraham, "Restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for thee, and thou shalt live."

<!-- PAGE 59 -->
16. And he called (for) a famine on the land ; ei'C?y ^taff of bread he hralie. The psalmist now passes from the Patriarchal to the Egyptian period of the history, by stating the occasion of Israel's migration into Egypt. The meaning of the first clause seems to be, that he summoned famine, as his instrument or servant, to come down upon the land, as sent from above, that is to say, from himself. The meaning of the last clause is, that the people were deprived of every customary means and source of subsistence. The figure of a staff or stay is a Mosaic one. See Lev. xxvi. 26, and compare Isai. iii. 1. It is near akin to the description of food as staying or sustaining the heart. See above, on Ps. civ. 15, The historical reference in the verse before us is to Gen. xli. 54.

17. He sent before them a man ; sold for a slave was Jose'ph. The same providential purpose is assigned to Joseph's bondage by himself. Gen. xlv. 5. With the last clause compare Gen. xxxvii. 36. Some interpreters, assuming, as we have already seen, that this psalm was composed in the time of the captivity, suppose a parallel, in this verse, between Joseph and Daniel, both of whom, in addition to their personal qualities, were sent into captivity before the body of their brethren ; both gained the royal favour and were exalted to high station in the land of their captivity ; and both employed the influence thus gained for i\\(^ advantage of their countrymen.    To the Jews in exile, such a PSALM   CV. 5^ parallel must have been not only interesting, in a historical or poetical point of view, but consolatory and encouraging as a token for good^ a sign that God was about to renew the exodus from Egypt in an exodus from Babylon.

<!-- PAGE 60 -->
IS. They hurt^ with the fetter^ ki2 feet; into iron camehh soul That Joseph was actually chained or fettered, is included in the true sense of the word bound, applied to him in the history. See Gen. xl. 3, and compare Gen. xxxix. 20, 22. They, the Egyptians, or his gaolers ; or the verb may be indefinitely construed, as if it had been said, his feet were hurt. The verb means elsewhere to humble or mortify, but is here used in its strict sense of afflicting, causing to suffer. The Prayer Book version of the last clause, the iron entered into his soul, is ungrammatical, the word for iron being masculine, while that for soul is, like the verb, feminine. The general sense is given in the text of the English Bible, and the exact form in the margin. The mention of the soul, as in many other cases, is of course not meant to be exclusive of the body, but to suggest the idea of intimate and heartfelt suffering.    See above, on Ps. iii. 3 (2.) xi. 1, etc.

19. Until the time that his word came (to pass), the saying of Jehovah tried him.. The last verb properly denotes the assaying of metals, but is figuratively applied to moral trial and purgation. See above, on Ps. xii. 7 (6.) xvii. 3. xviii. 31 (30.)xxvi. 2. Ti .; most probable meaning of the verse is, that during the two years which intervened between his explanation of the prisoners' dreams and the favourable issue to which it ultimately led, his faith in the divine promise, both to himself and to his people, was severely but favourably tried.    Compare the history in Gen. xl, xli.

20. The king sent and loosed him—the ruler of nations, and set him free. Both verbs strictly apply to the removal of his fetters, the first meaning properly to knock off (Isai. Iviii. 6), the other to 54 p s A T :m C V open for the purpose of removing. See abo\'e, on Ps. xxx 12 (11.) The king of Egypt is called a ruler of peoples^ eithei in reference to the tribes or nomes of Egypt itself, or because there were other nations tributary to him.

<!-- PAGE 61 -->
21. He made hivi lord of hisjiouse and ruler of all his 'wealth. Q'he literal meaning of the first clause is, he placed him lord to his house. . See Gen. xli. 40, 41, 43. xlv. 8. For the meaning of the last word in the sentence, see above, on Ps. civ. 24. It is one of the points of resemblance which are thought to identify the two psalms as the work of the same author.

22. To bind his chiefs at his plcasitrCy and his elders to make wise. The words translated chiefs and elders are those commonly applied to the heads of tribes and families, the hereditary magistrates under the patriaichal system. The application of the second word to Egypt is found also in the histor}^, Gen. 1. 7. At his plea sure J literally, ivith his soul, which some explain as a bold metaphor, describing Joseph's mind or soul as the cord or chain with which he bound the Egyptians, i. e. forced them to perform his will.    But see Ps. xvii. 9. xxvii. 12. xli. 3 (2.)

23. And (so) Israel entered Egypt., and Jacob sojourned m the land of Ham. This was the main event, to which those just recited were preparatory. Israel and Jacob are the names both of the individual patriarch and of his descendants as a nation. In this case both the applications are admissible, or rather requisite, in order to exhaust the writer's meaning. The patriarch himself came into Egypt, but his sons literally came with him, and all his descendants figuratively in him. The land of Ham., from whom Mizraim v/as descended.    Sec above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 51.

24. And he increased his people greatly^ and made them stronger than their enemies.    Increased., literally,  rendered fruitful.     Tho same verb is used in the promise to Abraham and Jacob (Gen. xvii. 6. xxviii. 2J, and in the history of Israel in Egypt, Ex. i. 7. The word here used for enemies is one implying persecution and oppression. The singular pronouns in the Hebrew, made him stronger than his enemies^ are in strict grammatical agreement with the collective noun people.

<!-- PAGE 62 -->
25. He turned timr heart to hate his people.^ to deal craftily with his servants. The first clause asserts God's sovereign control even of the free acts of his sinful creatures, a truth repeatedly affirmed in the history which this psalm recapitulates. See Ex. iv. 21. vii. 3, and compare 1 Sam. xxvi. 9. 2 Sam. xvi. 10. xxiv. 1. The last verb occurs only in the history of Joseph, Gen. xxxvii. 18. The corresponding term in Exodus (i. 10) is let us deal wisely, or more exactly, let us make ourselves tvise, as the verb in this case may be rendered, let us make ourselves subtle or crafty, both being reflexive forms. The historical allusion is of course to the murderous policy, which preceded the violent oppression of the Hebrews.

26. He sent Moses his servant (and) Aaron ichom he chose. The meaning is not Moses (who was) his servant, or (because he was) his servant, but (to be) his servaiit, his instrument in the great work of delivering his people. See above, on v. 6, and on Ps. xviii. 1. xxxvi. 1. Ixxviii. 70.

27. They placed among them the words of his signs and wonders in the land of Ham. The first phrase seems to mean nothing more than set before them o\: exhibited to them. Words of signs is by some understood to mean matters (or affairs) of signs, and to be either a pleonastic phrase for signs alone, or an emphatic phrase denoting all the signs. See above, on Ps. Ixv. 4 (3.) The <irst is a gratuitous assumption, the last a forced interpretati.v>     Better than either is the explanation which gives to wp^^s 66 PSALM   CV. its proper meanifig, and supposes stress to be intentionally laid on the divine word of Jeliovah, and the prophetic word of Moses and Aaron, in the way of threatening and command, as well as on the physical effects which followed these denunciations. Compare the use of words in Ps. vii. 1, and the explanation there given. SignSy i. c. tokens of God's presence and activity, and indications of his will. TVonderSj prodigies, miracles, the same word that occurs above in v. 5.

<!-- PAGE 63 -->
28. He sent darkness and made it dark^ and they did not resist his ivordsj or according to the marginal reading, his word. This is by some understood to mean the plague of darkness, which immediately preceded the slaughter of the first born, Ex. x. 22. But to this explanation there are two objections; first, that it entirely disturbs the order of the plagues, which is otherwise observed with great exactness, the only deviation being very trivial compared with this ; secondly, because it would then be" necessary to apply the last clause to Moses and Aaron, or to Israel in general, thereby making it unmeaning, or else to admit a contradiction of the history, which expressly says that the Egyptians did resist the word of God even after the plague of darkness, Ex. x. 27. The only remaining explanation is, that darkness, in the verse before us, as in many other cases, is a figure for calamity in general, and applied not to one plague in particular, but to the whole series, of which a more detailed account is then subjoined.

29. lie turned their waters to Mood and killed their fish. Here begins the more particular enumeration of the plagues of Egypt. Compare Ps. Ixxviii. 44, where the inconvenience specified is that they could not drink the water, whereas here it is the loss of their accustomed food. This last word is used as a collective in both languages.

30. Their land teemed with frogs—in the chamlers ofthdr kings. That even the.ie were not safe from the hateful intruders, is an aggravating circumstance, particularlj mentioned in the original threatening, and implied in the narrative of its execution. See Ex. viii. 3, 9. The first verb means to bring forth in abundance, and is so used in the history of the creation, with particular reference to the genesis of animals. Gen. i. 20.

<!-- PAGE 64 -->
31. He said, and the Jiy came and gnats- (or lice) in all their border. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 45, where the gnats or lice are omitted, and the flies precede the frogs. So here, the flies precede the lice, a slight departure from the order of the history. See Ex. viii. 5, 16. He said, i. e. he said so, which is tantamount to saying, he commanded. In all their border, i. e. every where within it, throughout the land. This expression is borrowed from the history.    See Ex. viii. 2 (vii. 27.)

32. He gave them hail for rain (and) flaming fire in their land. This, which is the common version, represents the sense correctly, but with a deviation from the form of the original, which is highly idiomatic. A bald translation is, he gave their rains hail, fire of fiames in their land. ^ The terms are chosen for the sake of an allusion to the promise in Lev. xxvi. 4, I will give your rains in their season. Instead of these he gave the Egyptians a destructive hail-storm.    Compare Ps. Ixxviii. 48.

33. And smote their vine and their fig-tree, and shattered the trees of their border. Compare Ps. Ixxviii. 47, where sycamores are particularly mentioned. The history says nothing of the vines, but speaks of the breaking of the trees, using the same intensive verb as here. See Ex. ix. 2b. Their border, as before, means their land or territory in its whole extent, just as the ends cf the earth is put for all its parts.    See above, on Ps. ii. 8.

34. He said, and the arbeh came, and the yelek, and (that) ieiihout number.    The two Hebrew words, here retained, denote JS PSALMCV. rarieties of the locust, and have no equivalents in English. Sef above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 46, where the first word here stands second and the place of the other is supplied by hasil^ another distinctive term of the same kind. Without number^ literally, there is no number.   See the same expression, Ps. civ. 25.

<!-- PAGE 65 -->
35. And devoured every herb in their land^ and devoured thz fruit of their ground. The verb, though varied in the common version, is the same in both clauses of the Hebrew. See above, on Ps. xlviii. 46, and com pare the original narrative, Ex. x. 5, 15.

36. And he smote all the firstborn in their land^ the first-fruits of all their strength. For the meaning of the last clause, see above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 51, and compare Ex. xii. 29, 30.

37. Andhebrought them outloith silve? u,nd icithgold^and there was not in his tribes a totttrer (or stumbler.) The first clause relates to the spoiling of the Egyptians, Ex. xii. 35, 36. The last word denotes a person unfit for military service. Compare Isai. V. 27.

38. Glad was Egypt at their going forth., for their fear had fallen upon them. This panic terror, which followed the last plague and facilitated the escape of Israel (Ex. xi. 1. xii. 31—33), accounts for the readiness with which the Egyptians gave whatever was demanded, and completely vindicates the children of Israel from the charge of borrowing what they never meant to pay. The terms used in the history denote the acts of asking and giving, not those of borrowing and lending. The terms of the last clause are derived from Ex. xv. 16. Deut. xi. 25.

39. He spread a cloud for a covering., and fire to give light by night.    See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 14.    The poetical description of the cloud as covering the host is derived from the statement that "the cloud of Jehovah was over (or above) them by day," Num. X. 34.   Compare Num. ix. 16. Neh. ix. 12. Isai. iv. 5, 6.

<!-- PAGE 66 -->
40. (The people) asked and he made quails come—and bread oj heaven satisfied them. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 25—27, and compare Ex. xvi. 4—13. Num. xi. 31. As to the alternation of the singular and plural forms, see above, on v. 24. Bread may either be the subject of the verb, as given above, or a qualifying term, (witk) bread.

41. He ojjencd a rock and forth gushed ivafers ; they ran in the wastes., a river. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 16, 20. The word translated wastes means, according to its etymology, dry places.

42. Because he rcmemlered his holy ivord witk Abraham his servant. This brings us back to the statement in vs. 8, 9, in proof of which this long array of facts has been presented. Nothing of all this would have taken place if God had been forgetful of his covenant. This covenant is here meant by his holy word, which is the refore followed by the preposition witk, as in Ex. ix. 24, where the covenant is expressly mentioned.

43. And brougkt out kis peopte in joy, in triumph his chosen {ones.) He remembered his promise and in execution of it brought out his people, etc. The parallelism oipeople and chosen throws light upon the latter term, as used in v. 6.

44. And gave to them nations'' lands, and peoples labour they inherit. The prominent idea is not that of gentiles or heathen, in the religious sense, but that of other nations, and whole nations, to whose place and possessions they succeeded. Labour is put for its result or product, as a synonymous Hebrew word is in Ps. Ixxviii. 46

<!-- PAGE 67 -->
45. To the end that they might keep his statutes and his laws observe. Hallelujah! The emphatic phrase at the beginning, corresponding to our phrases, to the end, for the purpose, or in order that, points this out as the qualification or condition of the promise which had been so gloriously verified. The same condition is expressed or implied elsewhere. See above, on Ps Ixxviii. 7, and compare Gen. xviii. 19. Deut. iv. 40. xxvi. 17 Hallelujah (praise ye Jah) as above, in Ps. civ. 35.
