<!-- psalm 106 | vol 3 | scan pages 67-85 -->

<!-- PAGE 67 -->
After an introduction, praising the divine goodness, and expressing the hope of a participation in it, vs. 1—5, this psalm contains a solemn confession of the sins of Israel through all the periods of his history ; in Egypt, v. 6—12; in the wilderness, V. 13—33 ; in Canaan, vs. 34—43 ; and a prayer, founded on encouraf^ing tokens of the Lord's compassion, that he will save his people from the punishment incurred by their unfaithfulness, YS. 44 48.     According to  Hengstenbcrg's hypothesis   already mentioned, this is the third psalm of the trilogy added to Ps. ci_ciii, in the times of the captivity, and a direct continuation of the series, since the moral condition of God's covenant, propounded at the close of. Ps. cv, is here acknowledged to have been violated by his people, who are also represented as actually suffering the punishment of this violation, but encouraged by returning tokens of a favourable change, to hope and pray for the forgiveness of their sins and the removal of the judgments which they have so well deserved The first verse and the two lasi form a part of the mixed composition in First Chronicles, which has been already mentioned. See above, on Ps. xcvi. 1. But a still more interesting parallel to this psalm is the prayer or confession in the ninth chapter of Daniel, which resembles it so much in subject, tone, and- diction, that although not otherwise demonstrable, it would not be absurd to regard the psalm before us as a lyrical paraphrase of that confession, prepared for permament and public use by Daniel himself or some contemporary writer.

<!-- PAGE 68 -->
1. Hallelujah ! Give tharnks unto Jehovah^ for (he is) good^for unto eternity (is) his mercy. The Hallelujah {'praise ye Jah !) which concludes the two preceding psalms, stands both at the beginning and the close of this. The exhortation to give thanks unto Jehovah is also found at the beginning of Ps. cv. The reason here assigned, that he is good, and his 7nercy endures forever, is expressed in the same words, Ps. c. 5.

2. Who shall tell the mighty deeds of Jehovah"? (Who) shall utter all his praise ? The potential meaning (who can tell ?) is here included in the simple future. Mighty deeds answers to a single word in Hebrew meaning strengths or poicers. The expression is borrowed from Deut. iii. 24, where the English Bible has the singular form might. The verb translated litter is a causative, who shall cause to hear or to be heard ? See above, on Ps. xxvi. 7. The interrogation involves a negative assertion, namely, that they cannot be fully expressed or duly celebrated.

3. Happy the keepers of judgme7it, the doer of righteousness at every time. The form of expression at the beginning is the same as in Ps. i. 1. The keepers of judgment are those who observe justice as the rule of their conduct, the same idea that is afterwards expressed in other words, the doer (or practiser) of rights eousncss, not occasionally merely but at all times. The change from the plural to the singular is common, where the latter denotes an ideal individual,  the representative  of a whole  class The condition here  propounded  is identical  with that in Ps cv. 45. ciii. IS. Dan. ix. 4.

<!-- PAGE 69 -->
4. Rememher me, Jehovah, U'ith the favmir of thy people ; visit me with thy salvation. The speaker is the Church or chosen people, and therefore prays to be remembered with the kindness due to her as such. Visit me, manifest thy favourable presence. See above, on Ps. viii 5 (4.) Such a prayer, uttered by the church itself, implies that the tokens of God's favourable presence had been interrupted or withdrawn.

5. To witness the welfare of thy chosen (ones), to rejoice in the joy of thy nation, to glory icith thy heritage. Our idiom requires the subject of the verb to be more distinctly indicated. The meaning evidently is, that I may witness, that I may rejoice, that I may glory. The phrase translated witness the welfare literally means to see in the good, i. e. to look on, to be a spectator, when thy chosen ones are in possession or enjoyment of good. Thy nation is here used instead of the customary phrase thy people, perhaps because the meaning is, the nation which is thy chosen people. The general meaning of the whole verse is, that I may once more be recognised and treated as thy people.

6. We have sinned loith our fathers, ice have done perversely, we have done icickedly. The connection with the foregoing context may be made clear by supplying a few intermediate thoughts. ' True, we have no right to expect this, much less to demand it. We have not performed the condition of thy covenant; we have not kept thy statutes or observed thy laws; we have not kept judgment or done righteousness.' The national confession here begun is nearly co-extensive with the psalm itself. The terms of this verse are borrowed, here as well as in Dan. ix. 5, from that great model of ecclesiastical and national devotion furnished by Solomon, in his prayer at the dedication of the temple, 1 Kings viii. 47. Compare Isai. lix. 12. With our fathers^ not merely like them, but as sharing their responsibility and guilt. Of the three verbs used in this confession, the first denotes failure to discharge one's obligations, the second wilful perversion or distortion, the third disorderly or turbulent transgression. See above, on Ps. i. 1.

<!-- PAGE 70 -->
7. Our fathers in Egypt did not understand thy wondrous works, they did not remember the ahundance of thy mercies^ and rebelled upon the sea, at the Red Sea. The general confession in V. 6 is now followed by a more detailed acknowledgment, beginning with the exodus from Egypt. The wondrous works of God, the things done wonderfully by him, then and there, for the deliverance of his people, the great body of them did not understand. Even those who referred them to their true source and author, did not fully appreciate the end for which they were performed, or enter into the majestic plan, in executing which they were permitted to be God's co-workers. The truth of this charge is abundantly established by the narrow, grovelling, selfish views and feelings so repeatedly betrayed by the generation which came out of Egypt, showing clearly that they did not practically understand God's dealings with them. This is probably the idea meant to be conveyed by the Hebrew verb, which usually means to act wisely, but is here modified by governing a noun directly. See above, on Ps. ii. 10. xiv. 2. The two-fold local designation, on the sea, at the Red Sea, was probably suggested by the parallelism in Ex XV. 4. The variation of the particle seems merely a poetical embellishment; the difierence in meaning is no greater than in our on and at. The Sea of Sea-icecd was the name given by the Hebrews and Egyptians to that bay or gulf of the Indian Ocean, which was called the Red Sea by the Grreek geographers.

8. And he saved them for his name'^s sake, to make known hi$ might.    This is an ajswer to a tacit objection, namely, that their conduct had been sanctioned by God's saving them. Tiue, he did save them, because they were necessary to his purpose. He saved them not for their sake but his own, to accomplish his own ends, and exhibit his own power.

<!-- PAGE 71 -->
9. A'?id he rebuked the Red Sea and it dried up^ and he made them go through the deeps like the desert. This is merely a specification of the general statement in the preceding verse. The divine intervention here commemorated was the more remarkable because it took place on the very spot where they first rebelled, as mentioned in v. 7. Though they disobeyed him at the .Red Sea, he nevertheless dried the Ked Sea, i. e. as much of it as was required to furnish them a passage. Rebuked, as in Ps. civ. 7. Like the desert, as in the desert, i. c. in a level and extensive plain, without obstruction or unevenness. See my note on Isai. Ixiii. 13, where the same comparison is used.

10. And he saved them from the hand of the hater, and redeemed them from the hand of the cneviy. Both epithets are intended to apply to Pharaoh, not only as a personal oppressor of the Israelites, but as the representative of Egypt, all of which now feared and hated the occasion of its multiplied and aggravated sufi"erings.

11. And the vaters covered their adversaries ; not one of them was left. The Psalmist dwells upon the completeness of the overthrow and destruction experienced by Pharaoh and his host, in o^der to aggravate the previous and subsequent ingratitude of Israel, as well as to enhance the free grace of Jehovah, and the fidelity with which he executed his engagements, even to the faithless.

12. And they believe his words, they sing his praise. Then (and not till then) do they believe. This is not an encomium on their faith, but a confession of their unbelief.    It was not till the pro telse was fulfilled that they believed it.    With tho first clause compare Ex. xiv. 31 ; with the second, Ex. xv. 1.

<!-- PAGE 72 -->
13. They made haste^ they forgot his deeds^ they did not wait for his counsel. Their propensity to evil was so strong, that they are said to have hastened to forget what God had done for them, which means much more than that they soon forgot it. They did not even wait for the promise to be verified by the event. The expression in the first clause is borrowed from Ex. xxxii. $. The works or deeds of God are not in this case, as in Ps. ciii. 22. civ. 24, the works of nature, but the plagues of Egypt. See Deut. xi. 3, and compare Dan. ix. 4

14. And they lusted a lust in the wilderness and temjpted God in the desert. The confession now passes from their sins in Egypt to their sins in the wilderness. The strong expression in the first clause relates to their wanton craving of animal food. See Num. xi. 4, 34. With the last clause compare Ps. Ixxviii. 18. The two words for wilderness and desert are the same as those in Ps. Ixxviii. 40.    See also Ps. Ixviii. 8 (7.)

15. And he gave them their request and sent (them) leanness in their soul. The last phrase is by some translated against^ by others into their soul; but it is really a qualifying phrase, designed to show that the emaciation or decay which was sent upon them was not bodily but spiritual. See Num. xi. 18, and compare Ps. Ixxviii. 10, 18.

16. A7id they were envious at Moses in the camp^ at Aaron^ the Holy One of Jehovah. This is another of their wilderness sins. See Num. chap. xvi. Aaron is not called the Saint of the Lord in reference to his personal holiness, which does not seem to have been eminent, but his Holy (or Consecrated) One, in reference to his sacerdotal dignity. ^6 PSALM   CVI.

<!-- PAGE 73 -->
17. (Then) opens the earth and swallowi Dathan^ and coveyi over the comjpany of Ahiram. This relates to the destruction of those followers of Korah who were not Levites. See Num. xvi. 32, 33, and compare Deut. xi. 6. From the first of these passage? some interpreters supply her mouth after o'pens ; but the absolute use of the verb is perfectly consistent with our idiom.

18. A'nd a fire devours their company^ a flame consumes (those) wicked (men.) This relates to the destruction of Korah himself and his Levitical followers.    See Num. xvi. 35. xxvi. 10.

19. They make a calf in Horeb, and boiv down to a molten image. This was a third sin committed in the wilderness. See Ex. xxxii. 1—6, and compare Ex. xxxiv. 4. The golden calf appears to have been an imperfect and diminutive copy of the bull Apis, worshipped in Egypt.

20. And exchange their glory for the likeness of an ox eating grass. This must be read in the closest connection with v. 19, in order to complete it. Their folly consisted in exchanging the true Grod, whose worship and whose favour was their highest honour, for the mere likeness of an irrational brute. Eating grasSy not in the act, but in the habit, of so doing. Although the golden calf at Horeb, and the golden calves at Dan and Beersheba, were all regarded as representatives of Jehovah himself, their worship was uniformly treated as idolatry, and as a virtual thouo^h not a formal or avowed renunciation of his service. Compare Jer. ii. 10—13.

21. They forgot God that saved them^ that did great (things; in Egypt.    That saved, that did ; literally, saving, doing.

22. Wonderful fthings) in the land of Ham^ terrible (things) on the Red Sea.    Wonderful, literally, (thingsJ made wonderful or strangely done     Terrible, literally, to be dreaded.    Compare ?s. cv. 23, 27.

<!-- PAGE 74 -->
23. And he saia he ivould destroy them—unless Moses his elect had stood in the breach hcfore, him^ to turn lack his wrath from destroying. The first and last verbs are diiferent in Hebrew, but have only one exact equivalent in English. The second clause is not a part of what Grod said, but a historical statement of what really prevented the execution of his threatening. He said he would destroy them, and he would have done so, had not Moses, etc. Moses is called the Elect or Chosen of Jehovah, as having been selected and set apart to be God's instrument in the great work of deliverance and legislation. The plural is elsewhere applied to the whole nation as the chosen people. See above, v. 5, and Ps. cv. 43. Stood in the breach is a military figure, drawn from the desperate defence of a beseiged town or fortress. Compare Jer. XV. i. Ez. xiii. 5. xxii. 30. The historical reference is to Ex. xxxii. 11—14. Deut. ix. 18, 19. To turn back his icrath is to prevent its accomplishing its object. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 38, and compare Num. xxv. 11.

24. And they rejected the 'pleasant land^ thei did not believe his word. This refers to the refusal of the people to invade the land of Canaan in the first year of their exodus from Egypt, and to their believing the report of the ten spies in preference to God himself. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 22, 32, and compare Num. xiv. 31. The land of desire^ the desired or desirable land, is a name also found in Jer. iii. 19.

25. And they murmured in their tents ; they did not hearken Id the voice of Jehovah, The form of expression in the first clause is borrowed from Deut. i. 2'^ ; in the second from Num. xiv. 22. ^.fS. And he lifted his hand to them^ to make them fall in the vAh derness. The first phrase does not mean, he raised his hand against them, or to strike them, but as the ancient gesture of swearing. See Num. xiv. 28, 30. Deut. i. 34. ii. 14. The last clause contains the oath itself, or what he swore, to wit, that he would make them fall, slay them, in the wilderness. See Num. xiv. 29, 32.

<!-- PAGE 75 -->
27. And to vialce their seed fall in the nations^ and to scatter them in the lands. As the appointed punishment of the older generation was to die in the wilderness, so that of their descendants was to die in dispersion and captivity among the Gentiles. See Lev. xxvi. 33, 38, and compare Deut. xxviii. 32, 36, 64, 68. The recollection of this threatening must have been peculiarly afiecting to the Jews in Babylon.

28. And they joined themselves to Baal Peor^ and ate the sacrifices of the dead. He now adds a sin committed near the end of the long error, and on the very borders of the Promised Land. The first verb is properly passive, they were joined., but this of course does not mean by others but themselves, and thus the simple passive comes to have a reflexive meaning. Baal Peer is the name given to Baal, or the supreme God of the Tyrians and Moabites, as he was worshipped, with licentious rites, at Peor, a mountain in the land of Moab. See Num. xxv. 1—3. The dead., not dead men, in allusion to necromantic superstitions^ but the dumb or lifeless gods whom they worshipped. See below, on Ps. cxv. 4—7, and compare 1 Cor. xii. 2.

29. And they provoked him by their crinces, and the plague broke out among them. The first verb means to excite both grief and indignation. Compare the use of the cognate noun in Ps. vi. 8 (7), and of the verb itself in Ps. Ixxviii. 58. The word translated plague., like its English equivalent, has both a generic and specific meaning ; that of a divine stroke or infliction in general. and that of a pestilential disease in particular.    See Num. xxv. 18,.19.

<!-- PAGE 76 -->
30. Then stood up Phinehas and judged, and (so) ivas stayed the plague. He stood (or rose) up from among the rest, presented himself before the people. He judged i. e. assumed the office and discharged the duty, from which the regular official judges seemed to shrink. The verb includes the act both of pronouncing and of executing judgment. See the narrative in Num. ch. XXV. The form of expression in the last clause is borrowed from Num. xvii. 13 (xvi. 48.)

31. And it ivas reckoned to him for righteousness, to generation ind generation, even to eternity. The form of expression is J^orrowed from Gren. xv. 6 ; but what is here meant is evidently not JL justifying act by which Phinehas was saved, but a praiseworthy act for which he, a justified or righteous man already, received the divine commendation and a perpetual memorial of his faithfulness. Compare Deut. vi. 25. xxiv. 13. The particular reward promised (Num. xxv. 13), that of a perpetual priesthood, is not here mentioned, but was familiar to the mind of every Hebrew reader.

32. And they angered (him) at the ivaters of Strife, and it vient ill with Moses, on their account. See above, on Ps. Ixxxi. 8 (7) xcv. 8. xcix. 8. The Hebrew word for strife is the name given to the place, Merihah. The object of the first verb is Jehovah, as in V. 29. It went ill with Moses, or, more literally, it was bad for Moses.

33. For they resisted his spirit, and he spake uriadvisedly with his lips. His spirit may grammatically signify either that of God or that of Moses. The latest writers are in favour of the first construction, which is not without analogies in other parts of Scripture (Isai. Ixiii. 10. Eph. iv. 30) , but the other secina entitled to the preference m this connection, because the first clause then contains the ground or reason of-, the other. It was because the mind of Moses was excited by their opposition, that he spake unadvisedly with his lips. The last verb is one used in the law to denote a precipitate inconsiderate engagement. Lev. v. 4.

<!-- PAGE 77 -->
34. They did not destroy the nations which the Lord said to them. The confession now passes from the sins of the wilderness to those of Canaan. The neglect to destroy the Canaanites completely was not only a direct violation! of God's precept, but the source of nearly all the public evils that ensued. There is no need of giving to the last verb a rare and dubious sense {commanded.) The meaning of the clause is, which Jehovah said to them (must be destroyed.)

35. And they mixed themselves witu the nations and learned their doings. The reflexive verb at the beginning indicates an active and deliberate amalgamation, as distinguished from a passive and involuntary one. The nations of the Canaanites, and those which inhabited surrounding countries. The primary idea is not that of gentiles or heathen, in the religious sense. Learned their doings or practices, learned to do as they did. With the first clause compare Jos. xxiii. 12, 13. Judg. iii. 6 ; with the second, Deut. xviii. 9. xx. 18.

36. And served their idols, and they were to them for a snare. The word translated idols, by its etymological affinities, suggests the idea of vexations, pains. See above, on Ps. xvi. 4. A. snare^ i. e. a temptation to idolatry.    Compare Deut. vii. 16.

37. And they sacrificed their sons and their daughters to thi demons. This last is the Septuagint version and, if not directly sanctioned, is at least referred to in the New Testament (1 Cov PSALM   CVI. 7i X. 20.) That the worship of idols was connected with that of fallen spirits, is neither improbable in itself nor contradictory to Scripture. According to the modern etymologists, the Hebrew word means lords or masters^ and is a poetical equivalent to Baalim, which means the same thing. Compare Deut. xxxii. 17, and the ^vqioi of 1 Cor. viii. 5. The word translated devils in Lev. 17. 7 is entirely different.

<!-- PAGE 78 -->
38. And they shed innocent bloody the hlood of their sons and daughters, which they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan; and defiled was the land ivith bloods. The first verb means to pour out and here implies a copious or abundant bloodshed, corresponding to the next verb, which is an intensive form of that used in v. 37. Blood, in the singular, is used in a physical sense ; the plural bloods in a mG?al one, always implying guilt, and especially the guilt of murder. See above, on Ps. v. 7 (6.) xxvi. 9. li. 16 (14.) Iv. 24 (23.) The first three members of the sentence have respect to the prohibitions in Deut. xii. 31. xviii. 10. xix. 10. With the last clause compare Num. xxxv. 33.

39. And they were polluted by their own doings, and went a whoring by their oion crimes. They defiled not only the land of promise but themselves. Or rather, this verse is explanatory of the last clause of v. 38, and shows that the pollution of the land was nothing more nor less than that of its inhabitants. The figure of spiritual whoredom or adultery is often used to signify the violation, by the chosen people, of their covenant with God. which is constantly described as a conjugal relation. See above, on Ps. xlv and compare Ps. Ixxiii. 27. This is not stated as an additional offence but as an aggravating circumstance attending the iniquities already mentioned.

40. And the anger of Jehovah was enkindled at his people, and y. abhorred his heritage.    This is the strongest form in which hU detestation of their sins could be expressed, but does not necessarily imply the abrogation of his covenant with them. The feeling described is like that of a parent towards his wicked children, or of husbands and wives, who do not cease to love each other, though grieved and indignant at each other's sins. The word heritage adds great point to the sentence. He abhorred the very people whom he had chosen to be his, not merely for a single generation, but for many.    See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 59, 65".

<!-- PAGE 79 -->
41. And he gave ihcm into the hand of nations^ and over them ruled their haters. The same nations whom they had rebelliously spared, with others of like spirit—the same nations who had led them into sin—were used as instruments of punishment. Compare Lev. xxvi. 17. Judges ii. 14.

42. And their enemies oppressed them, and they were bowed down under their hand. ' They not only governed them, but governed them tyrannically, so that they were not only under coercion and constraint, but humbled and degraded from the rank of an independent state to that of tributaries and bondsmen. With the terms of this verse compare Judg. i. 34. iii. 30. iv. 3. viii. 28.

43. Many times he frees them., and they resist (him) hy their counsel., and are hrought- low hy their guilt. Having given in the preceding verses a brief but lively summary of the Book of Judges, the Psalmist now passes, by an almost insensible transition, to the later periods of the history, and indeed to its catastrophe ; for the meaning of the last clause seems to be, that after all their fluctuations, they at length sink or fall into a ruinous condition, as the ultimate fruit of their rebellions. The meaning of the first clause is, that by their self-willed plans and projects they continually come into collision with the will of God, and with that great providential purpose, in promoting which it was their duty, and would have been their happiness, to co-operate With the last clause compare Lev. xxvi. 39. Ezek. xxxiii. 10.

<!-- PAGE 80 -->
44. A7id he has looked at their distress ivhen he heard them cry The idiomatic form of the original may thus be represented by a bald translation, and he saw in the distress to them in his hearing their cry. As this follows the brief statement of their downfall, there is much probability in the opinion, that it relates to the " tokens for good," which were granted to the exiled Jews in Babylon long before their actual restoration. With the first clause compare Ex. ii. 25. iv. 31. Deut. iv. 30. Ps. xviii. 7. cii. 3.

45. And he has rememhercd for them his covenant., and repented according to the abundance of his mercy. For them, i. e. in their favour, for their benefit. It does not qualify covenant^ but remembered. With the first clause compare Lev. xxvi. 42, 45. Ps. cv. 8, 42 ; with the second. Num. xiv. 19. Ps. v. 8 (7.) Ixix. 14 (13.) Neh. xiii. 22. The common version of the last word {mercies) rests upon the marginal or masoretic reading ; the more ancient text is mercy.

46. And has given them favour before all their captors. The literal translation of the first clause is, and has given them for mercies or compassions. This remarkable expression is borrowed from 1 Kings viii. 50 (compare 2 Chr. xxx. 9), not only here but in the history of Daniel and his fellow-captives (Dan. i. 9), which makes it not at all improbable, that what is there recorded is among the indications of returning divine favour here referred to by the Psalmist.

47. Sa.ve us, Jehovah, our God, and gather us from thenationSy to give thanks unto thy holy name, to glory in thy praise. Encouraged by these tokens of returning favour, the church prays that the hopes thus raised may not be disappointed, but abundantly fulfilled in the restoration of the exiles to their own land, in return for which she indirectly engages to render praise and thanksgiving to Jehovah as her liberator. We are thus brought back to the beginning of the psalm, and the voice of confession is again lost in that of anticipated praise. Instead of our God^ the parallel passa^^e (1 Chr. xvi. 36) has God of our Salvation. The word translated glory occurs only in that passage and the one before us. It is synonymous, however, with the one used in Ps. cv. 3, and often elsewhere, both meaning properly to praise one's self. With the second clause compare Ps. xxx. 5 (4.)

<!-- PAGE 81 -->
48. Blessed (be) Jehovah^ God of Israel^ from eternity even to eternity. And all the people says Ame^i. Hallelujah.^ Some interpreters regard the psalm as closing with the preceding verse, and the one before us as a doxology added to mark the conclusion cf the Fourth Book. But here, as in Ps. Ixxii. 19, it is far mortt probable that this doxology was the ©ccasion of the psalm's being reckoned as the last of a Book, notwithstanding its intimate connection with the one that follows. This probability is strengthened, in the case before us, by the addition of the words, and all the people says Amen.^ which would be unmeaning, unless the doxology formed part of the psalm itself. The additional words are borrowed from Deut. xxvii. 15—2Q. The parallel passage (1 Chr. xvi. 36) has. And all the people said Amen and give praise (or gave praise) to Jehovah., which last words are repieser.tcd, in the verse before us, by the Hallelujah {Praise ye Jaki) PSALM   evil. 75 PSALM   evil.

<!-- PAGE 82 -->
After propounding as his theme tho goodness of God in deli« vering his people, and especially in bringing them back from their dispersions, vs. 1—3, the Psalmist celebrates this great event, under the various figures of safe conduct throct-gh a desert and arrival in a populous city, vs. 4—9 ; emancipation from imprisonment, vs. 10—16; recovery from deadly sickness, vs. 17—22; deliverance from the dangers of the sea, vs. 23—32; then describes, in more direct terms, the fall of the oppressor, the restoration of Israel, and his happy prospects, vs. 33—42 ; ending, as he began, with an earnest exhortation to remember and commemorate Jehovah's goodness, v. 43. The psalm is so constructed as to admit of being readily applied, either literally or figuratively, to various emergencies; but its primary reference to the return from exile seems to be determined by vs. 2, 3. According to Hengstenberg's hypothesis, this psalm was added to the double trilogy by which it is preceded (Ps. 101—106), immediately after the return from exile, when the holy city was re-peopled, and the first harvest had been gathered, but the rebuilding of the temple had not yet begun. The whole seven then compose one series or system, intended to be used together in the public worship of the ancient church.

1 Give thanks unto Jehovah^ for he {is) good^ for unto eternity (is) his mercy. The repetition of the first words of the foregoing psalm, as the beginning of the one before us, strongly favours th» 7R PSiiLM  cvir. opinion, that the latter was designed to be a kind of supplement or appendix to the former.

<!-- PAGE 83 -->
2. (So) say the Redeemed of Jehovah^ 'whom he has redeemed from the hand of distress (or of i'he enemy.) What they are to say is not the exhortation in the first clause, but the reason for it in the last clause, of the foregoing verse. Let them acknowledge his unceasing mercy, who have just experienced so remarkable a proof of it. The ambiguous word (^2r) should,probably be taken in the same sense which it elsewhere has throughout this psalm. See below, vs. 6, 13, 19, 2S, and compare Ps. cvi. 44. Indeed the two senses may be reconciled by simply supposing the distress to be personified. Compare the unambiguous expression in Ps. cvi. 10. The Redeemed of the Lord is a favourite expression of Isaiah (xxxv. 9, 10. Ixii. 12. Ixiii. 3.)

3. And from the lands has gathered them^ from the east and from the west^ from the north and from the sea. The Babylonish exile is continually spoken of as a dispersion, either because it is considered as including other minor deportations, or because the migration of the great mass of the people into Babylonia was unavoidably accompanied, followed, or preceded, by a less extensive and more scattering migration of many individuals and families to other quarters. On the false assumption of a perfect parallelism as indispensable, some have supposed that sea is here put for the south. But this is not the only case in which the enumeration of the cardinal points is complete only in number. See Isai. xlix. 12, and compare Isai. xliii. 5, 6. Ivi. S. The mention of the sea instead of the south may perhaps have reference to the prophecy in Deut. xxviii. 68. The verse before us records the answer to the prayer in Ps. cvi. 47 and thus afibrds another indication, that the writer of the later composition had (he earlier in his eye^ and wrote with some intention to illustrate or complete it. PSALM   evil. 77

<!-- PAGE 84 -->
4. They waifuiered in the wilderness, in a desert way ; a city of habitation found they not. Here begins the first metaphorical account of the Captivity and Restoration, in which the exiles are described as wanderers in a desert icay, i. e. as some suppose a pathless desert, which sense, however, can scarcely be extracted from the Hebrew words. Others understand the phrase to mean a way, i. e. a course, a region to be traversed, which is desert; but this supposes way to be the subject and desert the qualifyinoterm, as they would be in English, but in Hebrew the precise sense is a desert of way^ or a way-desert^ which some interpreters explain to mean a desert in reference to its ways or paths, thus arriving, by a different course, at the meaning first su2"sested namely, that of a pathless wilderness. City of habitation may mean a habitable or inhabited city in general, or a city for them to inhabit in particular. The latter is more probable, because the word translated habitation is not an abstract but a local noun, meaning the place where men sit or dwell, according to the pri mary and secondary meaning of the verbal root. See above, on Ps. i. 1. It may here be either governed by city^ as above, or in apposition with it, a city, a dwelling-'plact, i. e. a city in which they might dwell. There is obvious allusion to Jerusalem, as well as to the great Arabian wilderness, although the contrast of the city and the desert suggests the idea of suffering and relief, by a natural as well as a historical association. See Ez. xxix. 5, and compare Job xii. 24.

5. Hungry—also thirsty—their soul in them shrouds itself. This verse continues the description of the wanderers in the desert. To avoid the ambiguity of an exact version, in which hungry and thirsty might seem to agree with soul, the substantive verb may be supplied in the first clause, {they are) hungry, also thirsty. The primary sense of the reflexive verb at the end of the sentence seems to be that of covering one's self with darkness, or sinking overwhelmed beneath some great calamity.    See above on Ps. Ixxvii. 4 (3), and compa.re the cognate forms in Vs. Ixi. 3 (2.) Ixv. 14 (13.) cii. i. Isai. Ivii. 16.

<!-- PAGE 85 -->
6. And they cried to Jehovah in their distress ; from their straits he frees them. Both the nouns, according to their etymology, convey the idea of pressure, compression, painful restraint. In their distress^ literally, in the distress to them^ that which they had or suffered. See above, on Ps. cvi 44, and compare Dent. iv. 30. The change from the past tense to the future seems intended merely to describe the act denoted by the second as more recent

7. And he led thevi in a straight course^ to go to a city of habi tation. No exact version can preserve or imitate the paronomasia arisiufy from the etymological affinity of the first verb and noun, analogous to that between the English walk and to ivalk, though the Hebrew forms are only similar and not identical. The idea of physical rectitude or straightness necessarily suggests that of moral rectitude or honesty, commonly denoted by the Hebrew word.

8. Let (such) give thanks to Jehovah (for) his mercy, and his iconderful icorks to the sons of man. Some interpreters make this the close of a long sentence, beginning with v. 4, and adopt, in all the intervening verses, a relative construction, as if he had said, let such as wandered in the wilderness, whose soul fainted in them, who cried unto the Lord, whom he led etc. let such give thanks unto his name. But although this is certainly the logical connection of the passage, its involution and complexity of form are as far as possible removed from the simplicity of Hebrew syntax, which prefers a distinct enunciation of particulars to all such artificial combinations. This verse constitutes the burden or chorus of the psalm.

9. For he has satisfied  :he craving soul, and the hungry soul
