<!-- psalm 107 | vol 3 | scan pages 86-95 -->

<!-- PAGE 86 -->
has filled with good. This is merely the conclusion of the first scene or picture, with a change of figure but a very slight one, as the want of food is one of the most painful and familiar hardships of a journey through a desert, and as such would necessarily occur to every Israelite who knew the story of the error in the wilderness. The first verb has the same sense as in Ps. civ. 13; the last noun the same sense as in Ps. ciii. 4. civ. 28. The unusual word translated cravhig is borrowed from Isai. xxix. 8.

10. Dicellmg in darkness and deathshade^ hound in affiiction and iron. Here begins the second picture which exhibits the same sufierers, no longer as wanderers in the desert, but as closely confined prisoners. The darkness primarily meant is that of the dungeon, but not without reference to the frequent use of darkness in general as an emblem of misery. See above, on Ps. Ixviii. 7(6.) The idea of darkness is then expressed in a still stronger form by the striking compound deathshade or shadow of death, a bold but beautiful description of the most profound obscurity. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 4. The leading words of the two clauses might, in one respect, be more exactly rendered, inhalitants of darkness., ^prisoners of affliction. See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 61 There is no mixture of literal and figurative terms in the last clause, but only the addition of a specific to a general term The affliction particularly meant is that produced by iron^ i. e. chains or fetters. See above, on Ps. cv. 18, and with the verse before us compare Isai. xlii. 7. xlix. 9. Job xxxvi. 8. Luke xiii. 16.

11. Because they resisted the ivords of the Mightiest., and the. counsel of the Highest contemned. This verse introduces what was wanting in the first scene, the fact that these were not innocent sufferers. However cruel or unjust their sufierings at the hands of men, they were but condign punishments as sent by Grod. This is a point of contact and resemblance with the preceding psalm, whicli is not without importance. Resisted^ rebelled against, a favourite expression in these psalms. See above, on Ps. cv. 28. cvi. 7, 33, 43. Words or sayings, commonly applied to promises, and even here combining that idea with the sense of command, because the command which they resisted or rebelled against had reference to the plan or counsel of the Lord for the deliverance of his people. The word translated mightiest is {^^) one of the divine names, here represented by an English superlative, in order to preserve the antithesis with Most High in the other clause.

<!-- PAGE 87 -->
12. And he hrought down, with trouUe, their heart; they stumbled and there was no helper. The remedial design and effect of their punishment are beautifully set forth in the first clause. The word translated trouble means originally work or labour, then the pain att-ending it or flowing from it. Stumbled may here be put for fell, or have the milder sense of tottering or stumbling, as distinguished from a total fall. JVo helper, or none helping, except God, as intimated in the next verse ; or against God, when he chose to punish them.

13. And they cried to Jehovah in their distress; out of thdr straits he saves them. An exact repetition of v. 6, except that the first verb is exchanged for a cognate one, differing only in a single letter, and the last verb for a synonyme still more familiar. As to the consecution of the tenses, see above, on v. 6.

14. He brings them 02it from darkness and deathshade, ai.d their bonds he severs. The terms used in describing the deliver^ ance are studiously made to correspond with the account of the captivity in v. 10. It is more remarkable, though possibly fortuitous, that the words of the second clause are the same which David puts into the mouth of the revolted nations, Ps. ii. 3. The English word severs is here used instead of breaks, in order to represent the more uncommon and poetical term used in Hebrew PSALM   evil. gi

<!-- PAGE 88 -->
15, 16. Let (such) give thanks unto Jehovah {for) his mercy^ and his wonderful works to the sons of man, because he has troken doors of brass, and bars of iron has cut asunder. The burden m V. 15 is in all respects identical with v. 8, but the supplemen-. tary verse differs, according to the prominent figures in the two scenes or pictures. As the idea of famine was selected, in v. 9, from among the hardships of the wilderness, so here the fastenings of the prison are presented in precisely the same manner. In this striking regularity of form, combined with vividness and beauty of conception, there is evidence of art and skill as well as genius. The verb in the first clause of v. 16 is an intensive form of the verb to break, and might here be rendered shattered, shivered, or the like. The corresponding verb in the last clause is a similar intensive of the verb to cut. The whole verse is copied from Isai xlv. 2, where we find the promise, of which this is the fulfilment

17. Fools by their course of transgression, and by their crimes, afflict themselves. Here begins the third scene or picture, at the very opening of which the charge of folly is added to the previous one of guilt. The reflexive meaning of the verb is essential and cannot be diluted into a mere passive, without weakening the whole sentence, the very point of which consists in making them the guilty authors of their own distresses. The word for transgression is the one that originally means revolt from God, apostasy. See above, on Ps. xxxvi. 2 (1.) Course, literally, way or path. By, literally,/rem, as when we speak of an effect as arising or proceeding from a cause.

18. All food their soul abhors, and they draw mar to the very gates of death. This verse abruptly brings before us the same persons whom we lately beheld wandering in the desert, and then chained in a dark dungeon, now suffering from disease, such aa not only mars their pleasures, but threatens to abbreviate their lives.    Compare Ps. cii. 3. Job xxxiii. 20.    The expression very 4* 82 PSALM   evil. gates^ in the translation of the last clause, is intended to convey the full force of the Hebrew preposition p5) which is stronger than (z^) io. See above, on Ps. Ivii. 11 (10.) With the last clause compare Ps. ix. 14. Ixxxviii. 4 (3.) Job. xxxiii. 22. Isai. xxxviii. 9

<!-- PAGE 89 -->
19. And they cry to Jehovah in their distress; out of their straits he saves them. See above on vs. 6, 13, with the last of which this agrees exactly.

20. Hfi sends his word and heals them, and makes them escajpe from their destructions^ i. e. those which threatened them, and from which escape appeared impossible. He sends his uwrd^ he issues his command, exerts his sovereign power and authority. The last word in the Hebrew occurs only here and once in Lamentations (iv. 20.) The modern interpreters have 'pits or graves; but such a derivation from the verbal root is without example or analogy. See above, on Ps. xvi. 10- "With the first clause compare Ps. xxx. 3 (2.) xxxiii. 9. Isai. Ivii. 18 ; with the last Ps. ciii. 4.

21. 22. Let (such) give thanks unto Jehovah (for) his mercy and his ivonderful icorks to the sons of man ; and let them sacrifice sacrifices of thanksgivings and recount his deeds with {joyful) singing. The freedom from technical and artificial rules of rhetoric or versification, even in those parts of the composition which exhibit most of art and skill, is peculiarly observable in this verse, where, instead of adding to the uniform chorus or refrain some particular image from the scene just closing, as in vs. 9, 16, the Psalmist continues and completes the sentence by repeating the exhortation to give thanks, in another but still figurative form, derived from the musical and sacrificial customs of the temple worship.    They must not only utter thanks but offer them PSALM   CYir. 83 in sacrifica.    They must not only offer them in sacrifice but sing them.    With the first clause compare Ps. 1. 14.

<!-- PAGE 90 -->
23. Going down the sea in ships, doing business in the viany waters. Here again the scene is shifted, and the exiles pass before us, not as wanderers in the desert, or as captives in the dungeon, or as suffering from sickness, but as mariners eno^acred in an adventurous voyage. Descending, going down, seems to be an idiomatic phrase, borrowed from Isai. xlii. 10, and equivalent to going out to sea in English. The expression may have reference to the general elevation of the land above the water (see above, on Ps. xxiv. 2), but is directly opposite to our phrase, the high seas, and to the classical usage of ascending ships, i. e. embarking, and descending, i. e. landing. Doing business has its ordinary sense, as applied to trade or traffic. The last words may also be translated great or mighty waters ; but the usao-e of the Psalms is in favour of the version many rcaters, which moreover forms a beautiful poetical equivalent to sea or ocean. This image could not fail to suggest, however indirectly, the idea of the world with its commotions, of which the constant emblem is the sea. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 4 (3.) Ixv. 8 (7.)lxxxix. 10 (9.) xciii. 3, 4, and compare Matt. viii. 23—26. Mark iv. 36—41. Luke viii. 22—25.

24. They saw the works of Jehovah, and his wonders in the deep. The pronoun at the beginning is emphatic, (it is) they (that) see (or saw) the works of the Lord, as if others could lay claim to no such privilege or honour. Both the senses of the phrase Godh works are appropriate in this connection, his works of creation and his works of providence. The last word is another poetical equivalent io sea or ocean.    See above, on Ps. Ixix. 3 (2.)

25. And he said—and there arose a stormy wind, and it lifted up his leaves.    He now parenthetically specifies some of the divine works wtich he had just mentioned in the general. The form of expression at the beginning, as in all like cases, involves an allusion to the history of the creation, where each creative act is preceded by God's saying, let it be. So here, the full sense is, and God said (let a stormy wind arise) and a stormy wind arose. See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 9. Arose^ literally, stood, stood up, as in Ps. cvi. 30. A stormy wind, literally, a wind of storm or tempest. Instead cf his waves we may read its waves, and refer the pronoun to the remoter antecedent (sea) in v. 23, Deep, in v. 24, is of a different gender. It is equally correct, however, and more natural, to refer it to Jehovah, as the maker of fhe sea and the ruler of its waves. Compare the expression thy ivaves and thy billows in Ps. xlii. 8.    See also Isai. li. 15. Jer. xxxi. 35.

<!-- PAGE 91 -->
26. They rise (to) the heavens; they sink (to) the depths; their soul with evil dissolves itself. That the verbs in the first clause relate not to the waves but to the mariners, is evident from the last clause. The words rise and sink are used instead of ascend, descend, or go up, go down, because the Hebrew verbs have no etymological affinity, nor even a single letter common to theii roots. The ellipsis of the preposition to is frequent, or rather verbs of motion in Hebrew may be construed directly with a noun, where our idiom requires the intervention of a particle. Evil in the last clause may denote their evil state or painful situation, with all the circumstances comprehended in it; or more specifically, their distress and painful feelings. Compare Gen. xli. 29. The reflexive form of the last verb is not essential to the meaning of the sentence, as in v. 17, and may therefore be explained as an intensive or emphatic passive, it is melted. See above, on Ps. xxii. 15 (14.) With the whole verse compare Ps. civ. 8.

27. They reel and stagger like a drunken (man), and all their wisdom is confounded.    By wisdom we are here to  understand reason^ common sense, that which makes men rational and raises them above the brutes. This is plain from the comparison with drunkenness, the only point of which must be the loss of reason. The reeling and staggering may relate to the irregular and violent motion of a vessel in a storm, or, as the last clause does, to the mariners themselves. The last verb literally means is swallowed up, or retaining the reflexive form, still more strongly, swallows itself up.    But see above, on the last word of v. 26.

<!-- PAGE 92 -->
28. A7id. they cried to Jehovah in their distress, and out of then straits he brings them forth. The consecution of the tenses corresponds to the relation of the acts which they denote, as viewed by a spectator. ' Now they have cried to the Lord, and now he is bringing them forth.' The verse differs from vs. 13, 19, in the first verb, which agrees with v. 6, and in the last verb which is unlike both.

29. He stills the storm to a calm, and silent are their waves. This is an amplification of the last phrase in v. 28, and shows how it is that he brings them forth. The first verb strictly means he makes it stand, but in a sense directly opjDOsite to that of a synonymous though different verb in v. 25. Calm, literally, silence, stillness. Their waves, the waves from which they suffer, by which they are buffeted.    Compare his waxes in v. 25.

30. And they are glad that they are quiet, and he guides them to their desired haven. The connection might be rendered clearer by translating with the English Bible, then are they glad^ etc. The last word in the verse occurs only here, and is by some translated shore, by others goal ; but it is safer to retain the old interpretation, which affords a perfectly good sense, and rests upon the joint authority of the Babbinical tradition and the Sept uagint version i6 PSALM   CVII.

<!-- PAGE 93 -->
31, 32. Let (such) give thanks to Jehovah (for) his mercy^ and his wonderful icorJxS to the sons of man ; a7id let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, and in the session of the ciders praise him. Here again we have a striking instance of variety combined with nniforraity. The burden or chorus, as in v. 22, is followed by a solemn exhortation to connect the required thanksgiving with the forms of public worship. But instead of the temple with its sacrifices and its chants, the reference in this case, it should seem, is to the spiritual worship of the synagogue. The word translated congregation is one constantly applied to Israel, as fietually gathered at the place of worship. See above, on Ps. xxii. 23 (22.) The word session is employed in the translation of the last clause, not for the sake of a verbal coincidence with Presbyterian institutions, a coincidence however which is not to be denied, but because it adequately represents the Hebrew (iri)2) in its double acceptation, as denoting both the act and the place of sitting, and especially of sitting together. See above, on v. 4. The elders, here as elsewhere, are the heads of tribes and families, the hereditary chiefs and representatives of Israel.

33. He turns streams into a wilderness, and springs of water to a thirsty place. As the shifting of the scene is not renewed in the remainder of the psalm, which, on the other hand, if viewed as a distinct and independent portion of the poem, mars its symmetry of structure, it seems best to regard these verses as an episode belonging to the last scene and containing the praises of the people and their elders. The figures in this verse are often used, particularly by Isaiah, to denote an entire revolution, whether physical or moral, social or political. Compare Isai. xliv. 26, 27. 1. 2. Jer. 1. 38. li. 36. It thus prepares the way for the subsequent rejoicings in the downfall of Babylon and the restoration of the exiled Jews PSALM   evil. g7

<!-- PAGE 94 -->
34. A frvitful land to saUness^fo?- the wickedness of those dwelling in it. The sentence is continued from the foreo-oino- verse the nouns being governed by the verb he turns. The first phrase literally means a land of fruit. The next noun may be taken either in the abstract sense of saltness or the concrete one of a mline soil or region, and by implication barren. For., literally fro7nj as in v. 17 above. Compare the threatening in Isai. xiii. 19, and the great historical type of all such judgments, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.

35. He turns a desert to a pool of water, and a dry land into springs of water. This is the reverse of the description in v. 33 to which the terms are studiously conformed. In both cases the first verb literally means he sets or puts, and the noun translated springs means issues or places where the waters issue. Compare Isai. XXXV. 7. xli. 18. xliii. 20.

36. And has settled there famished {men), and they have estaUished a city to dwell in. There is no need of assuming, that the desert thus transformed is Palestine or Canaan. It is better to adhere to the general import of the figures, which is change for the better. Settled, literally, caused to dwell. The primary meanin^y of the last clause is that those once homeless have a home; but there is of course a reference to the repossession and rebuildinc? of Jerusalem. The last phrase in Hebrew is the same with that translated city of habitation in v. 4.

37. And have sowed fields, and planted vineyards, and mad., fruits of increase. The form of all these verbs requires them to be understood, like those of v. 36, as referring to time actually past, from which some ha-^e inferred that the date of the psalm itself lay between the first ingathering of the fruits by the returned Jews and the founding of the temple, to which there is here no allusion.    The word translated increase is applied elsewhere  to 88 PSALM   C VI I. the annual productions of the earth. See Lev. xxv. 16. To mafce these is to gain or acquire them by cultivation, as we speak of making money, but of raising corn. See above, on Ps. Ix. 14 (12.)

<!-- PAGE 95 -->
38. And he has blessed them, and they have increased greatly, and (even) their cattle he does not diminish. Increased, not in numbers merely, but in wealth, strength, and prosperity. See Deut. XXX. 16. The verb to diminish is borrowed from Lev. xxvi. 22. The negation may be understood as a mciosis^ meaning to increase or multiply. The whole of this description agrees well with the encouraging appearances, by which the Restoration was attended and immediately followed, before the colony experienced reverses or had lost the fresh impression of their recent sufferings and privations, which are mentioned in the next verse.

39. And they were diminished and hrought low, from oppression, suffering, and grief. The only grammatical construction of the verbs is that which refers them to a former time, i. e. to the condition of the people under Babylonian oppression. The sense is therefore quite mistaken in the English, though correctly given in the ancient versions. The contrast is intended to enhance tho joy and thankfulness of the restored exiles. These, now so prosperous, are the very men who lately were in abject misery.

40. Pouring contempt on princes—and he has made them wander in a waste (where there is) no way. From the exiles he reverts to their Deliverer, and describes him as spurning the most lordly of their persecutors—nay as making them take the place of those whom they oppressed, which idea is conveyed by the figure before used of wanderers in a pathless desert. See above, on V. 4, and compare Job. xii. 21, 24. The word for waste or void is one of those used in Gen. i. 2, to describe the original condition of the earth.
