<!-- psalm 109 | vol 3 | scan pages 99-109 -->

<!-- PAGE 99 -->
This psalm consists of three parts; a complaint of slanderous and malignant enemies, vs. 1—5 ; a prayer for the punishment of such, vs. 6—20 ; and a prayer for the sufferer's own deliverance, with a promise of thanksgiving, vs. 21—31. According to the theory repeatedly referred to, this is the second psalm of a Davidic trilogy. See above, on Ps. cviii. This psalm is remarkable on two accounts; first, as containing the most striking instances of what are called the imprecations of the psalms ; and then, as having been applied in the most explicit manner to the sufferings of our Saviour from the treachery of Judas, and to the miserable fate of the latter. These two peculiarities are perhaps more closely connected than they may at first sight seem. Perhaps the best solution of the first is that afforded by the second, or at least by the hypothesis, that the Psalmist, under the direction of the Spirit, viewed the sufferings of Israel, which furnished the occasion of the psalm, as a historical type of the Messiah's sufferings  from   the treachery of Judas,  representing  that  of PSALM   C IX. 93 Judah, and that with this view he expresses his abhorrence of the crime, and acquiesces in the justice of its punishment, in stronger terms than would have been, or are elsewhere, employed in reference to ordinary criminals.

<!-- PAGE 100 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. By David. A Psalm. God of my prais^^ be not silent. The first inscription was particularly necessary here because the psalm might otherwise have seemed to be a mere expression of strong personal feeling. See above, on Ps. li. 1. God of my praise., i. e. the object of it, whom [ delight, or am accustomed, or have cause, to praise. Be not silent means not merely do not refuse to answer, but amidst the threats and railings of my enemies, let thy voice be heard also. See above, on Ps. xxviii. 1. xxxv. 22. xxxix. 13. (12.)

2. For a wicked mouth and a mouth of deceit they have opened ; they have spoken against me with a tongue of falsehood. Compare Ps. xxxv. 11. Iv. 4 (3.) The subject of the first verb is his enemies, and not the nouns preceding, as the verb translated open is elsewhere always active. Against me, literally, with me, implying that they charged him falsely to his face, a circumstance remarkably fulfilled in Christ.    See Matth. xxvi. 59.

3. And with words of hatred they have compassed me, and have fought against me without cause. See above, on Ps. xxxv. 20. xxxvi. 4 (3.)

4. In return for my love they are my adversaries—and I (am) prayer. The first word in Hebrew strictly means instead or in lieu, of. The unusual expression at the end can only mean, 1 am all prayer, I do nothing but pray, which some understand to signify, I bear their persecution meekly and continue my devotions undisturbed by their calumnies and insults. But as the whole context is descriptive, not of the suiFerer's behaviour but of his PtALM   CIX. m uUt miwrnUm •/ ■««, meaning that •bott, €tt Pt. Is. 13 (11), which agrees

<!-- PAGE 101 -->
^ : .my ri*r a^'r^rwri/i (persc- ) 8m ftboTt, M Pt. lx.,14 (12), between bdort «• lk«« ii Mi Um ilightest differ- P5^AL¥   CIX -itt r*rm»^, r»   1 —'. ,apri; : ;:,;-hraent -M; wJk % f^yif ^ ^ foffcrer*! own delirer- .    ^ a Msb* of tlMbfimir. ^<  •!—31-    According to _   t '7 , ^Jililj ifl<rTr^ tA. tbt^ h tKe tMood pMlm of a Ikfb Irihj-    Sm  lb -^     ThU psalm is re- ^   r§i1f «• IV* ftMowita; ^'«t. ^* coouiaing the most striking ,^.. ./ ,1^1 ^r c^4 tkt uapittttinTit f^the pwlms ; and 4 i^^^^M*. manner to the to the ^^ PSALM   CIX 93 Jadah, and that with thU tIcw he expresses his abhorreio of tho crime, and acquiesces in the justice of its punishment, intronircr terms than would hare been, or arc elsewhere, empy* J in reference to ordinary criminal^

<!-- PAGE 102 -->
1.    To tht  *    ti'j   .nuiuuin.      i)ij  I'liru:.      A I'unn.     i od of my praif^ U not sUtnt. The first inscription was paicularly necessary here because the psalm might otherwise have ftined to be a mere CX7 - "^- -^ -f strong personal feeling. See abo^; on Vs. li. 1.    God aise^ i. c.    the   object   of   it,   hoin   I delight, or am accnstomed, or hare caoso, to praise. Be nut tUtnt means not merely dc not refust to ansxcer^ but atri^t the threats and railings of my enemies, let thy Toicc be heard so. :!^co above, on Ps. xxriii. 1. xxxr. 22. mix. 13. (12.)

2. For a iticktd mouth and a mou4k of dtceit they havtpcntd ; they have spoken againti me trith a tongue of faltehood. Compare Ps. xxxT. 11. Ir. 4 (3.) The subject of the first t6 i.s his enemies, and not the nouns preceding, as the verb inflated open is elsewhere ahnjs active. Against m«, literally, \th m«, implying that they charged him falsely to his face, a circuBtanco remarkably fulfilled in Christ.    Sec Malth. xxvi. 59.

3. And xcith itords of hatred they have compassed me, ul hive fought against me uUh. ut aiu9e. See above, on Ps. xiv. 20, xxxvL 4 (3.)

4. /« prayer. jny lore they in {am) or in I am «gme my ^|iPO# and 94 PSALM   (MX. enemies', a more probable sense is, I am forced to be continual'ljr praying for protection against them and deliverance from them.

<!-- PAGE 103 -->
5. They lay ufon mc evil instead of good and hatred instead of lore. The first verb literally means they set or place. Instead of the good and the love which they owed me, or in return for my kindness and love to them, as in v. 4.

6. Appoint thou over him a wicked oiu^ and let an adversary stand upon his right hand. The first verb in Hebrew means to place one in authority or charge over another. See Gen. xxxix. 5. xli. 34. Num. i. 50 and compare Lev. xxvi. 16. Jer. xv. 3. Wicked one and adversary (Satan), although here used as appellatives or common nouns, are the very terms applied, in the later scriptures, to the Evil Spirit or the Devil. See Job i. 6. ii. 1. 1 Chr. xxi. 1. Zech. iii. 1,2. In the place last cited he stands too at the right hand of the sinner to accuse him. The change of number in the verse before us might, in conformity with usage, be explained as a mere difi"erence of form, the ideal person denoted by the singular being really the type and representative of the whole class denoted by the plural. But the constancy with which the change, in this case, is adhered to, rather favours the conclusion, that a real individual is meant, to whom the Psalmist turns from the promiscuous crowd of his oppressors. For a similar transition, see above, on Ps. Iv. 13 (12.)

7. When he is tried he shall go forth guilty^ and his prayer shall he for sin. The future meaning of the second verb is determined by the form of the third, which is not apocopated, as in vs. 12, 13. When he is tried, literally, in his being tried. The nezt phrase simply means that he shall be condemned ; the last clause, that his very prayer for mercy shall be reckoned as a new offence, a strong description of extreme judicial rigour and inexorable justice. PSALM   CI X. 95

<!-- PAGE 104 -->
8. Let his days he feiv—kis office let another take. The word translated ojfice is a collateral derivative of the verb at the beginning of V. 6, and means comraission, charge. This expression makes it still more probable that a real individual is referred to, as the possession of a charge or office could not be common to the whole class of malignant enemies. The Septuagint version is «7itorxo7TijVj oversight or supervision, corresponding exactly to the meaning of the Hebrew verb in v. 6. This translation is retained in Acts i. 20, where the verse before us is expressly quoted by Peter, as " written in the book of Psalms," and applied to the case of Judas Iscariot.

9. Let his sons he orjphans and his wife a widow. He here passes from the person of the criminal to the sufferings of those dependent on him.    See Ex. xx. 5.

10. And wander—wander—let his sons and heg, and seek (their food) from (among) their ruins. The emphatic repetition of the first verb is expressed, in the English Bible, by a paraphrase, let his children he continually vagahonds. The last clause is extremely graphic, representing them as creeping forth in search of food from amidst the ruins of their habitations.

11. Let a creditor entrap all he has., and strangers plunder (the fruit of) his labour. The first noun originally means a lender, but in usage has the accessory sense of a hard creditor, an extortioner. The verb means to lay a snare for., as in Ps. xxxviii. 13 (12.) Strangers., not his natural heirs, not members of his family.    See Deut. xxv. 5.

12. Let there he no one to him extending mercy., and let there be no one showing favour to his orphans. The verb translated extend literally means draw out., prolong^ and is applied to the continued indulgence both of hostile and amicable feelings     See 9(5 PSALM   CI X. above, on Ps. xxviii. 3. xxxvi. 11 (10.) Ixxxv. 6 (5.)     Showing favour, exercising mercy, as in Ps. xxxvii. 21.

<!-- PAGE 105 -->
13. Let his posterity he cut off; in the next generation^ hloitea nut he their name. The word for posterity strictly means futurity, after part, or latter end. See above, Ps. xxxvii. 37, 38. Cut off, literally, for cutting off. The next or after generation, as in Ps. xlviii. 14 (13.) The plural pronoun their refers to the col« lective noun posterity.

14. Let the guilt of his fathers he rememhered hy Jehovah, and hit mother^ sin not hlotted out. This is perhaps the most fearful imprecation in the psalm, as it extends the consequeaces of transgression, not merely to the children, who might naturally be expected to partake of them, but to the parents. It is not to be forgotten, however, that in all such cases, the personal guilt of the implicated parties is presupposed, and not inferred from their connection with the principals. Rememhered hy (literally to) Jehovah, which, may possibly mean brought to his remembrance, recalled to mind by another, perhaps by the accuser before mentioned.

15. Let them he hefore Jehovah always, and let him cut off from the earth their memory. The subject of the first clause is the guilt and sin mentioned in the verse preceding.    Before Jehovah^

"in his sight, an object of attention to him.   See above, Ps. xc. 8 With the last clause compare Ps. ix. 7 (6.) xxxiv. 17 (16.)

16. Because that he did not rememher to do mercy, and persecuted an afflicted and poor man, and one smitten in heart, to kill (him.) There is an antithesis between the rememher of this verse and the rememhered of v. 14. Though he did not remember mercy, God remembers guilt. The last phrase, to kill, denotes both the design and the  extent of the malignant persecution, whicb PSALM   CI X 97 was deadly or to death. The object of the persecution is the psalmist himself, or the ideal person whom he represents. See V. 22.

<!-- PAGE 106 -->
17. A7id he loved a curse., and it has come (u'pon) him ; and ht delighted not in Messing., and it has removed far from him. This verse contemplates the event as actually past. The optative meaning, given to the verbs in the English Bible, is as inconsistent with the form of the original as the future meaning given in the Prayer Book and the ancient versions.

18. And he has put on cursing as his garment., and it has comt like water into his inside, and like oil into his bones. There is an obvious climax in this verse. That which is first described as the man's exterior covering, is then said to be within him, first as water, then as oil or fat, first in the vessels of his body, then in his very bones. The general idea is that the curse, which he denounced and endeavoured to inflict on others, has taken possession of himself, both within and without. Compare Num. v. 22, 24, 27. The first clause admits of a different construction, which would make it descriptive of the crime and not tho punishment. He put on cursing as his garment, and (now) it has come, etc. This construction introduces an antithesis, and there by adds to the point of the sentence, and is also recommended by the analogy of v. 17.

19. Let it be to him as a garment (that) he wears, and for a beU let him always gird it. This is not a mere reiteration of the figure in the first clause of v. 18, but conveys the additional idea of a habitual and constant presence. The word belt is used in tho translation of the last clause, because the Hebrew word to which it corresponds is not the usual derivative of the verb that followa^ but etymologically unconnected with it.

20. (Be) this the wages of my adversaries from Jehovah^ and VOL. III.—5 of those speaking evil against my soul. The pronoun this in tho fil'st clause refers to the whole preceding series of denunciations. 1 fie word translated wages means originally work^ and secondarily the price or recompense of work or labour, and is so used in the law of Moses. See Lev. xix. 13. It is here peculiarly appropriate because it represents the misfortunes of his enemies as the direct fruit of their own misconduct. No single word in English can express this double meaning of the Hebrew. Such is their work and such their wages. The word translated adversaries is a cognate form to that used in v. 6, and might suggest the idea of my Satans; but this would probably convey too much. From Jehovah.) their reward or recompense to be expected from him, oi already bestowed by him. The description in the last clause in eludes insult, slander, and malicious plotting.

<!-- PAGE 107 -->
21. And thou., Jehovah., Lord., do ivith vie for thy nameh sake, because good is thy mercy, set me free. The emphatic thou at the beginning indicates a contrast between God and Lis oppressors Do with me is a common English phrase meaning deal with we, dispose of me ; but no such idiom exists in Hebrew, and the best authorities regard the construction as elliptical and make it mean, do kindness (or sheio mercy) to me. With the last clause compare Ps. Ixiii. 4 (3.) Ixix. 17 (16.)

22. For afflicted and poor (am) /, and 7}iy heart is wounded within me. This, though indefinite in form, is equivalent to saying, I am the afflicted and poor man whom the malignant adversary persecuted, as was said in v. 16. The word translated wounded strictly means pierced or perforated, a stronger expression than the one in v. 16. With the first clause compare Ps. 3d. 18 (17.) Ixix. 30 (29.)

23. Like a shadow at its turning I am gone ; I am driven away like the locust.    The first comparison is the same with that in Ps. cii. 12. Our idiom enables us to imitate tlie phrase I am gonCj a passive which in Hebrew occurs only here. The other verb is rare, but its meaning is sufficiently determined by usao-e. The allusion here is to the violence with which a cloud of locusts in the east is scattered by the wind. Compare Ex. x. 19. Joel ii. 20. Nah. iii. 17.

<!-- PAGE 108 -->
24. My knees totter from fasting^ and my Jlesh fails from fat- Tiess. The last phrase is obscure but seems to mean from being fat J so that it is not fat; the privative usage of the preposition being very common. The sense thus put upon the verb is justified by the analogy of Isai. Iviii. 11, where an equivalent expression is applied to failing waters. Some interpreters, however, insist upon retaining the strict sense both of verb and noun, and understand the clause to mean, my flesh lies or deceives the eye, by no longer appearing as it once did, or by seeming to exist when it is gone, from oil, i. e. from want of oil, because no longer taken care of and anointed. But no construction could well be more forced and far-fetched. It may also be objected that the external use of oil was to anoint the head on festive occasions, not to fatten the person or preserve the flesh.

25. And I have been a reproach to them, they see me, they shah thdr head. A reproach, an object of contempt, as in Ps. xxii. 7(6.) xxxi. 12 (11.) As to the meaning of the gesture mentioned in the last clause, see above, on Ps. xxii. 8 (7.)

26. Help me, Jehovah, my God, save me, according to thy mercy. The renewed description of his sufi"erings, in vs. 22—25, is followed by a renewed petition for deliverance, corresponding to that in V. 21. According to thy mercy, i. e. in proportion to its greatness and the freeness with which it is exercised.

27. And they shall know that this (is) thy hand ; thou, Jehovah 100 PSALM   CI X.      . hast done it. The optative construction, let them knew, and the Bubjunctive one, that they may know, are really involved in the more exact translation, they shall know. The subject of the verb may be men in general, or the persecuting adversaries in particular, more probably the latter, because they are referred to, both before and after. This is thy hand, i. e. this deliverance is the product of thy power.    Compare Ps. lix. 14 (l3.)

<!-- PAGE 109 -->
28. They loill curse, and thou wilt bless ; they have risen wp, and shall he shamed, and thy servant shall he glad. The first clause, expressed in our idiom, would be, they may curse hut thou wilt bless. Risen up, i. e. against me, a favourite expression in the Psalms. Shamed, in the pregnant sense of being disappointed, defeated, confounded. Thy servant, i. e. I as such, in that capacity or character.

29. Clothed shall my adversaries he with confusion, and dressed, as a robe, in their shame. This is not the mere expression of a wish, like that in v. 18, which would here be out of place, but a confident anticipation, with which he concludes the psalm. Compare Ps. Ixxi. 13. The word translated robe denotes a garment reaching to the feet, and expresses therefore still more strongly the idea that his foes shall be completely covered with confusion

30. I will thank Jehovah greatly tvith my moiUh, and in the midst of many will I praise kim. He vows that his thanksgiving shall not be merely mental or domestic, but audible and public. With the last clause compare Ps. xxii. 23 (22.)

31. For he will stand at the right hand of a poor (man), to savi {him) from the judges of his soul. This assigns the special reaeon of his promised praise. The verse is in strong contrast to V. 6 above, especially if Satan be there taken as a proper name The right hand here is not the place of honour but of protection.
