<!-- psalm 11 | vol 1 | scan pages 110-113 -->

<!-- PAGE 110 -->
PSALM   XI.

The Psalmist Is advised, by friends or fees, to escape by flight from the inextricable difficulties in which he finds him self involved, vs. 1—3. This he refuses to do, as inconsistent with his faith in the righteousness and grace of God, vs. 4—7. The logical relation of these parts makes the form of the whole som'ewhat dramatic, although this peculiarity is much less marked than in the second psalm. The language is not so much that of a historical person as of an ideal sufferer, representing the whole class of persecuted innocents. There is no specific reference to any incidents in David's life, although some of the images were probably suggested by his recollections, both of Saul's persecution and of Absalom's rebellion. The general resemblance of this psalm to that before it, and the special resemblance of v. 2 to Ps. x. 8, 9, may account for its position in the Psalter. The very difficulties of this psalm are proofs ot its antiquity and strong corroborations of the title, which ascribes it to David.

1. To the chief musician, belonging to him as the performer, and to David, as the author. In Jehovah I have trusted, and do still trust. How ivill (or ca?i) ye say to my sold, Flee (to) your mountain (as) a bird 1 The profession of confidence in God at the beginning is the ground of the following interrogation, which implies wonder and disapprobation. How can ye say so ? really means, ye should not say so. The question seems to be addressed to timid or desponding friends, rather than to taunting and exulting enemies, as  some suppose.— To my soul does not simply mean to me, but so as tc affect my feelings. See above, on Ps. iii. 3 (2.) In the genuine text the verb flee is plural, because addressed to the whole class represented by the ideal sufferer in this case. Hence the frequent change of number throughout the psalm. See above, on Ps. x. 10. The exhortation to flee must be understood as implying that there is no longer any hope of safety.— To your mountain, as a customary place of refuge, not for.birds, but for per* secuted men. The comparison with a bird has no particular connexion with this clause, but is a kind of afterthought, sue:gesting the idea of a solitary helpless fugitive. (Compare 1 Sam. xxvi. 20 and Lam. iii. 52.) There may be an allusion to the words of the angel in Gen. xix. 17, as there certainly is to one or both these places in our Lord's exhortation to his followers, Matth. xxiv. 16.

<!-- PAGE 111 -->
2. For lo, the wicked icill tread (i. e. bend) the bow ; they have fixed their arroiv on the string, to shoot in darkness at the straightforward (upright) of heart. These are still the words of the advisers introduced in the preceding verse, assigning a reason for the advice there given.— Tread the bow ; see above, on Ps. vii. 13 (12.) Will tread, are about to tread, are treading. The preterite which follows refers to a late? point of time. The speakers are supposed to describe what the\ see actually passing. ' They are bending the bow, (and now) they have fixed the arrow on the string.' The graphic vividness of the description is impaired, if not destroyed, by giving both the verbs a present form.—Fixed, i. e. in its proper place. The same verb occurs above, in Ps. vii. 13 (12.) Make ready is too vague in the case before us.—In dark?wss, in the dark, in secret, treacherously. See above, Ps. x. 8, 9.— The straight of heart, the upright and sincere. We do not use the adjective in this sense ; but we have the cognate substantive, rectitude which properly means straightnw<!.

<!-- PAGE 112 -->
3. For the pillars (ox foundations) ivill be (are about to be) destroyed: what has the righteous done, i. e. accomplished 1 The pillars or foundations are those of social order or society itself. These are said to be destroyed, when truth and righteousness prevail no longer, but the intercourse of men is governed by mere selfishness. The question in the last clause implies that the righteous has effected nothing, in opposition to the prevalent iniquity. The past tense represents this as a matter of actual experience, but as one which still continues. The substitution of any other form in the translation is gratuitous and ungrammatical. The true relation of the tenses is correctly given in the^rayer Book Version. For the foundations ivill be cast down, and what hath the righteous done ?

4. Jehovah (is) i?i his palace (or temple) of holiness; Jehovah (or as to Jehovah), in the heavens (is) his throne. His eyes behold, Ids eyelids prove the sons of men. He is so ex alted that he can see, and so holy that he must see and judge the conduct of his creatures. By an equally grammatical but less natural construction, the whole verse may be thrown into a single proposition. ' Jehovah in his holy temple, Jehovah whose throne is in heaven, his eyes, &c.'—For the meaning of the word translated temple, see above on Ps. v. 8 (7)—Eyelids are mentioned as a poetical parallel to eyes, being the nearest equivalent afforded by the language.— Try or prove, as if by seeing through them.    With the whole verse compare Ps. cii. 20 (19.)

5. Jehovah the righteous ivill prove, will prove the righteous, and the wicked and the lover of violence his sold hates. The sentence might also be divided thus : Jehovah will prove the righteous and the wicked, and the lover of violence his soid hates. Different from both is the masoretic interpunctioii, which seems, however to be rather musical than grammatical or logical.—The divine proof or trial of the righteous implies favour and approval like the knowledge spoken of in Ps. i 6; but in neither case is it expressed. Violence, including the ideas of injustice and cruelty. See above, on Ps. vii. 17 (16.) His soul has hated and still hates. This is not simply equivalent to he hates, but denotes a cordial hatred. Odit ex animo. He hates with all his heart.

<!-- PAGE 113 -->
6. He ivill rai?i on wickea (men) snares, fire and brimstone, and a raging wind, the portion of their cup. The mixed metaphors show that the whole description is a tropical one, in which the strongest figures elsewhere used, to signify destruction as an effect of the divine wrath, are combined. Rain is a natural and common figure for any copious communication from above, whether of good or evil. Snares are a favourite metaphor of David for inextricable difficulties. See above, vii. 16 (15), ix. 16 (15), x. 9.—Fire and brimstone are familiar types of sudden and complete destruction, with constant reference to the great historical example of Sodom and Gomorrah. See Gen. xix. 24, and compare Ezek. xxxviii. 22. Job xviii. 15.—Raging wi?id, literally wind (or blast) of furies, is another natural but independent emblem of sudden irresistible inflictions. . The second Hebrew word is elsewhere used for strong indignation (Ps. cxix. 53), and is once applied to the ragings (or ravages) of famine. (Lam. v. 10.)— The portion of their cup, or their cup-portion, something measured out for them to drink, according to the frequent Scriptural representation, both of God's wrath and favour, as a draught, or as the cup containing it. Compare Ps. xvi. 5. xxiil. 5, with Matt. xx. 22, xxvi. 3d. The meaning of the whole verse is that, notwithstanding the present security of the ungodly, they shall, sooner or Inter, be abundantly visited with every variety of destructive judgment

7. For righteous (is) Jehovah; righteousness he loves/ tht upright (man) shall his face behold.     The for suggests the PSALM  XI. 9^ intimate connexion between God's judgments on the wicked and his favour to the righteous. The second clause is a necessary inference from the first. The nature of God determines his judgments and his acts. He who is righteous in himseli cannot but approve of righteousness in others. The righteousness of others is in fact nothing more than conformity to his will and nature. Nor does he merely approve of righteousness in the abstract; he rewards it in the person of the righteous man. This idea is expressed in the last clause, which admits of several constructions. It may mean that the upright shall behold his face, i. e. enjoy his favourable presence, as in Ps. xvii. 15. But the collocation of the singular noun and the plural verb, with the analogy of v. 4 above, is in favour of a different construction: his face shall behold (or does behold) the righteous, i. e. view them with favour and affection. Because the original expression is not properly his face, but their face ox faces, Luther explains this as a reason why God loves the righteous, to wit, because their faces look upon (the) right, or that which is right. Another construction, founded on the same fact, is, the righteous shall behold (it with) their faces. It is better, however, to regard this as an instance of that remarkable idiom in Hebrew, which applies to the One True God, verbs, nouns, and pronouns in the plural, and which some explain as a pluralis majestaticus, like that employed by kings at present, and others as a form of speech transferred from polytheism to the true religion. Most probably, however, it was intended to express the fulness of perfection in the divine na ture, not without a mystical allusion to the personal distinction in the godhead. The most remarkable examples of this usage may be found in Gen. i. 26. iii. 22. xi. 7. Job xxxv. 10. Ps. lviii. 12. Ecc. xii. 1. Isai. vi. 8. liv. 5.—The face is here, like the eyelids in v. 4, a poetical equivalent to eyes, and the same parallelism reappears in Ps. xxxiv. 16, 17 (15, 16): 'the eyes of Jehovah (are) towards the righteous ;' 4 the face of Jehova; (is) against evil-doers.'
