<!-- psalm 110 | vol 3 | scan pages 110-110 -->

<!-- PAGE 110 -->
A poor moTij as in v. 16, means this poor man, i. e. me a poor man. Compare Ps. xxxiv. 7 (6) The last clause is correctly paraphrased in the common version, ihose that condemn his soul. PSALM    ex.

This is the counterpart of the Second Psalm, completing the prophetic picture of the conquering Messiah. The progressive development of the Messianic doctrine lies in this, that the Kingship of Messiah, there alleged and confirmed by a divine decree, is here assumed at the beginning, and then shown to be connected with his Priesthood, which is also solemnly proclaimed, and its perpetuity ensured by a divine oath. This constitutes the centre of the psalm, v. 4, to which all the rest is either introductory, vs. 1—3, or supplementary, v. 5—7. The repeated, explicit, and emphatic application of this psalm, in the New Testament, to Jesus Christ, is so far from being arbitrary or at variance with the obvious import of the psalm itself, that any other application is ridiculous. The chief peculiarity of form is a frequent change of person, not unlike that in Ps. xci.

1. By David. A Psalm. Thus saith Jehovah to my Lorc\ Sit thou at my right hand, uritil I make thine enemies thy footstool. The ascription of the psalm to David is not only uncontradicted by external evidence, but corroborated by the internal character of the composition, its laconic energy, its martial tone, its triumphant confidence, and its resemblance to other undisputed psalms of David. In addition to all this, we have the authority of Christ himself, who not only speaks of it as David's, but founds an argument upon it, the whole force of which depends upon its having been  composed by him.    See Matt. xxii. 43 102 PSALM   ex. Mark xii. 3G. Luke xx. 42, and compare Acts ii. 34. As a further confirmation of the truth of this inscription, some allege the obvious relation of this psalm to those before it, as forming with them a Davidic trilogy. See above, on Ps. cviii. 1. Thus saith Jehovah, or more exactly, a dictum (or saying) of Jehovah. For the origin and usage of this formula, used only in prophetic declarations, see above on Ps. xxxvi. 2 (1.) My Lord, i. e. David's, as our Saviour explicitly declares in the passages already cited, yet not of David mei-ely as a private person, nor even as an individual king, but as representing his own royal race and the house of Israel over which it reigned. The person thus described as the superior and sovereign of David and his house and of all Israel, could not possibly be David himself, nor any of his sons and successors except one, who, by virtue of his twofold nature, was at once his sovereign and his son. See Rom. i. 3, 4. That the Lord here meant was universally identified with the Messiah by the ancient Jews, is clear, not only from their own traditions, but from Christ's assuming this interpretation as the basis of his argument to prove the Messiah's superhuman nature, and from the fact that his opponents, far from questioning this fact, were unable to answer him a word, and afraid to interrogate him further (Matt. xxii. 4G.) The original form of expression, in the phrase Sit at my right hand, is the same as in Ps. cix. 31. A seat at the right hand of a king is mentioned in the Scriptures as a place of honour, not arbitrarily, but as implying a participation in his power, of which the right hand is a constant symbol. See above, on Ps. xlv. 10 (9), and compare Matt. xix. 28. The sitting posture is appropriate to kings who are frequently described as sitting on their thrones. See above, on Ps. xxix. 10. In this case, however, the posture is of less moment than the position. Hence Stephen sees Christ standing at the right hand of God (Acts vii. 55, 56), and Paul simply says he is there (Rom. viii. 34.) The participation in the divine power, thus ascribed to tha Messiah, is a special and extraordinary one, having reference tt»
