<!-- psalm 111 | vol 3 | scan pages 112-119 -->

<!-- PAGE 112 -->
the total subjugation of bis enemies. This idea is expressed bj? the figure of their being made his footstool, perhaps with allusion to the ancient practice spoken of in Josh. x. 24. This figure, itself, however, presupposes the act of sitting on a throne. It does not imply inactivity, as some suppose, or mean that Jehovah would conquer his foes for him, without any intervention of his own. The idea running through the whole psalm is, that it is in and through him that Jehovah acts for the destruction of his enemies, and that for this very end he is invested with almighty power, as denoted by his session at the right hand of God. This session is to last until the total subjugation of his enemies, that is to say, this special and extraordinary power of the Messiah is then to terminate, a representation which agrees exactly with that of Paul in 1 Cor. xv. 24—28, where the verse before us is distinctly referred to, although not expressly quoted. It is therefore needless, though grammatical, to give the until an in elusive meaning, namely, until then and afterwards, as in Ps. cxii. 8 below. This verse, it has been said, is more frequently quoted or referred to, in the New Testament, than any other in the Hebrew Bible. Besides the passages already cited, it lies at the foundation of all those which represent Christ as sitting at the right hand of the Father. See Matt. xxvi. 64. 1 Cor. XV. 25. Eph. i. 20—22. Phil. ii. 9—11. Heb. i. 3, 14. viii. 1. X. 12, 13. 1 Pet. iii. 22, and compare Rev. iii. 21.

2. The rod of thy strength loill Jehovah send forth from Zion, rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. The Psalmist now addresses the Messiah directly. The idea latent in the figures of the first verse, namely that of power, is here expressed. The word (ntslo) translated rod never means a sceptre^ as the synonymous term (uid) sometimes does, from which it is distinguished by Ezekiel (xix. 11), but a rod of correction and of chastisement. See Jer. xlviii. 12, and compare Isai. ix. 3 (4.) x. 5, 15, xiv. 4, 5. Ez. vii. 10, 11.    It   is  here  named  as the  instrument with 104 ' PSALM   ex. which the foes are to be subdued. Compare Ps. ii. 9. Tliera may be an allusion to the rod of Moses. See Ex. xiv. 16, 21, and compare Isai. x. 24, 26. The rod of thy strength^ or thy rod of strength, thy strong rod, or rather the rod by nx^ans of which thine own strength is to be exerted. As this strength is not human but divine, it is said to be sent forth by Jehovah out of Zion, considered as his earthly residence, the seat of the theocracy. See above, on Ps. xx. 3 (2.) The verb translated rule is not applied in usage to a peaceful reign, but to coercive or compulsory dominion over conquered enemies. See above, on Ps. xlix. 15 (14), and compare Num. xxiv. 19. The imperative here involves prediction in its strongest form. As if he had said : All is ready for the conquest; there is no resistance; there can be no doubt of the result; rule, therefore, in the midst thine enemies, i. e. over the very enemies by whom thou art surrounded, and who threatened to dethrone thee.

<!-- PAGE 113 -->
3. Thy people (are) free-will-offerings in the day of thy power, in holy decorations, from the loomh of the dawn, to thee {is) the dew of thy youth. Every member of this very obscure verse has been a subject of dispute and of conflicting explanations. The common version of the first words {thy people shall he willing) is entirely inadmissible as an exact translation, since the word translated willing is a plural substantive of the feminine gender, an(? not an adjective agreeing with the masculine singular noun people. The idea, however, is the same, but expressed with far more strength and beauty. The plural noun just mentioned is the one used to denote spontaneous gifts, or freewill-offerings, under the law ^f Moses. See above, on Ps. liv. 8 (7), and compare Ex, sxv. 2. XXXV. 29. xxxvi. 3. Lev. xxii. 23. By supplying the correlative verb, which may be considered as latent in the noun, we obtain the sense, thy people (offer) voluntary gifts. But by supplying the substantive verb, which is far more natural and common, we obtain the still more striking sense, thy people are PSALM   ex. lOf theiii.*®lves such gifts, i. e. they freely consecrate themselves to God. In this sense of voluntary self-dedication the reflexive form of the verbal root is used even in historical prose (1 Chr. xxix. 14, 17), especially in reference to military service (Judg. v. 2, 9. 2 Chr. xvii. 16.) The day of thy power^ the day in which it is exerted and displayed in the subjugation of thine enemies. The next phrase literally means, in heauties (or ornaments) of holinessj which may either have its obvious spiritual sense, as in Ps. xxix. 2, or that of holy decorations^ with allusion to the sacerdotal dress, which is expressly called garments of holiness^ Lev. xvi. 4. The last is the sense put by the modern interpreters upon the phrase, which then means that the people, when they make this solemn oftcring of themselves to God, appear clothed in sacerdotal vestments, as the servants of a priestly king (v. 4 below), and themselves a "kingdom of priests" (Ex. xix. 6.) The uwmh of the dawn (or day-break) is a very strong poetical description of the origin or source of the dew which immediately follows, and the sense of which must determine that of the whole clause. The most probable opinions as to this point are the following. Some suppose the clause to be descriptive of the multitude of warriors who devote themselves to the Messiah, and who are then described as no less numerous than the drops of dew born from the womb of morning. The objection to this is, that it lays too much stress upon mere numbers, and expresses that idea by a figure neither common nor altx)gether natural. Another explanation makes the point of the comparison with dew, not numbers, but beauty, brilliancy thus corresponding to the holy decorations of the other clause. Here again the comparison selected is by no means obvious, much less familiar. Lovely or beautiful as dew is not a combination likely to occur to the mind of any writer. In the two interpretations which have now been given, youth must be taken in the sense of young men, like the Latin puhes and juventus, when applied to a youthful soldiery, or made to qualify the noun before it, youthful dew, still meaning the young warriors.    But of such ^06 PSALM   ex. a figure there is not a trace in Hebrew usage, and in the only other place where the word (rmb']) occurs, it evidently means youth^ as a period of human life (Ecc. xi. 9, 10.) Free from all these objections is the supposition, that the clause relates not to the numbers or the beauty of Messiah's people, but to their perpetual succession, expressed by a fine poetical comparison with dew, engendered afresh daily from the womb of the morning. Youth will then have its proper sense, as denoting the perpetual youth of the Messiah, whose body is thus constantly renewed by the successive generations of his people. This construction also enables us to divide the clause more equally than in the masoretic interpunction, which, at all events, is either incorrect or rather musical than logical.

<!-- PAGE 115 -->
4. Sworn hath Jehovah^ and will not repent. Thou (shalt be) a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek. The declaration in the last clause of v. 3 is here repeated in another form, and with a statement of the ground or reason upon which it rests. What was there poetically represented as the perpetual youth of the Messiah is here more solemnly described as a perpetual priesthood, indissolubly blended with a perpetual kingship, both secured by the oath of God himself. He will not repent, there is no fear or even possibility of his breaking or retracting this engagement, for such it is, and not a mere declaratory attestation of the present fact or general truth, as it mi_2;ht seem to be from the common version, not only here but in Heb. v. 6. vii. 17, 21, in every ore of which places the Greek conforms exactly to the Septuagint version and the Hebrew text, the art being constantly supplied by the translators. That the clause is a promise, and as such relates directly to the future, is clear from the whole tenor of the psalm as a prophetic one, as well as from the oath, which is not used in Scripture to attest mere matters of fact, but to confirm the divine promise and threatenings. The indefinite expression, a priest, is intended to describe the oflace in itself considered, without reference to PSALM   ex. J07 temporary distinctions and gradations. It therefore comprehends whatever appertained to the ofl&ce of the Pligh Priest, as the head and representative of all the rest. After the order^ i. e. according to the manner, character, or institution. It is remarkable that this phrase (like rn"l!?'2 in v. 3) is almost peculiar to this psalm and the book of Ecclesiastes, being found besides in only one place (Job v. 8.) In all the direct quotations of the verse in Hebrews, the Septuagint version of this word (rd^tj') is retained. But in one of the more indy-ect citations (Heb. vii. 15) another word (6//0K5r7]ra) is substituted, showing that the essential idea is that of likeness or resemblance. This likeness consists primarily in the union of the regal and sacerdotal offices. See Gen. xiv. IS. The meaning of the verse in its original connection is, that this royal conqueror is also a priest, who ma,kes atonement for the sins of his people, and thus enables and disposes them to make the dedication of themselves described in the preceding verse. The perpetuity of this relation, and its confirmation by the oath of God, are attendant circumstances but essential, and as such insisted on by the apostle, Heb. vii. 20—24. The coincidences founded on the meaning of the names Melchizedek and Salem (Heb. vii. 2), and on the want of hierarchical succession in both cases (Heb. vii. 3), are perfectly legitimate but not essential to the understanding of the verse in its original connection. The inspired commentary on this sentence, which occupies the whole seventh chapter of Hebrews, is not intended merely to explain its meaning, but also to make use of its terms, and the associations coupled with them, as a vehicle of other kindred truths, belonging to the Christian revelation, and not necessarily suggested by the Psalm to its original readers.

<!-- PAGE 116 -->
6. The, Lord on thy right hand has smitten^ in the day of hii anger^ kings. Some suppose this to be addressed to Jehovah, and the Lord to mean Messiah, on the ground that they could not each be on the right hand of the other.    See above, v. 1.    That they 108 PSALM   ex. could be so, however, only shows that the whole description is tt figurative one, and that the principal figure has a two-fold meaning. On the right hand has precisely the same meaning here as in Ps. cix. 31, where it denotes the place of protection or assistance, the figure being probably derived from the usages of war, in which one who succours or protects another may be said to strengthen his right hand, as the member which he uses in his own defence. In one sense, therefore, the Lord is at the right hand of Jehovah ; in another sense, Jehovah is at his. This assistance, far from excluding, presupposes his own action, or rather, what Jehovah is described as doing for him he does through him. See above, on v. 1. The word translated smite is very strong and has repeatedly occurred before. See above, on Ps. xviii. 39 (38.) Ixviii. 22, 24 (21, 23.) The day of Jehovah's wrath is coincident with that of the Lord's strength in v. 3. The strength of the Messiah, as a conqueror, is to be exerted in giving effect to Jehovah's wrath against his enemies. The position of the word kings at the end of the sentence, although harsh and almost ungrammatical in English, is retained in the translation for the sake of its eiOPect upon the emphasis and point of the description. The objects of Jehovah's wrath and the Messiah's strokes are not to be mere ordinary men, but kings, if they continue to oppose themselves. See above, on Ps. ii. 2, 10. The tense of the verb may be regarded as an instance of praderitum propheticum, describing what is certainly to happen as already past.

<!-- PAGE 117 -->
6. He will judge among the nations—he has Jllled {them) with corpses—he has smitten the head over much land (or over the wide earth.) By another sudden change of form, the Messiah is again spoken of as a third person. The judgment here ascribed to him is oniy another name and figure for the conquest just described. The form of expression in the last clause is unusual and obscure. The common version makes both head and land collectives, tL heads over many countries.    Some interpreters explain the second I SALM   ex. 109 word in this way, but the first more strictly, as denoting a single fuler over many countries. Others invert the terms and understand by head the various chiefs of nations, but by tarth tho whole earth with its qualifying epithet of great or wide. Amidst these questions of construction or minute interpretation, the general idea is clear enough, to wit, that of universal conquest on the part of the Messiah, and extending to all earthly principalities and powers.

<!-- PAGE 118 -->
7. From the hrook in the icay he will drinky therefore will he 'aise the head. According to the masoretic interpunction, in the way does not qualify the brook but he will drink, a distinction of little exegetical importance. Unlike the foregoing verse, the one before us is perfectly clear in its particular expressions, but obscure in its general import and relation to the context. The most probable meaning of the first clause is, that he shall not be exhausted like those wandering in the desert (Ps. cii. 24. cvii. 4, 5) but refreshed and strengthened, with a reference, as some suppose, to the relief experienced by Samson (Judg. xv. 18, 19.) The raising of the head, in the last clause, is an obvious and intelligible figure for exhilaration, or relief from dejection and depression, which is naturally indicated by the hanging of the head. The only question is whether this eflfect is here supposed to be produced in the conqueror himself or in others. In favour of the former explanation is the parallel clause, which represents him as assuaging his own thirst. In favour of the other is the analogy of Ps. iii. 4 (3) xxvii. 6, where God is said to raise the head of man. As in other doubtful cases, where the senses are not incompatible or exclusive of each other, it is safe, if not entirely satisfactory, to leave them side by side, the rather as the words could probably not fail to suggest both ideas tc tl^e Hebrew reader. ilO PSALM   CXI. PSALM   CXI.

<!-- PAGE 119 -->
This is an alphabetical psalm, in which the Hebrew letters mark the beginning not of verses but of clauses. The first eight verses contain each two clauses ; the last two consist of three. The psalm begins with an invitation to the public praise of God, V. 1, then assigns, as the ground and object of this praiso, his dealings with his people, vs. 2—9, and ends with the conclusion, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, v. 10. There is nothing in the psalm itself to determine its date or its historical occasion. According to Hengstenberg, it is the first psalm of a trilogy, added to the ancient one preceding (Ps. cviii—ex.) after the return from exile.

1. Hallelujah ! I will thank Jehovah with a whole hearty in the company of the u-pright and in the congregation. The Hallelujah {praise ye Jah) marks the designation of the latter psalms for permanent use in public worship, as the inscription to the chief musician does that of the older ones. With a whole heart., or lu-ith all {my) hearty as it is fully expressed in Ps. Ixxxvi. 12. Compare Ps. cxix. 2. The word translated company means properly a circle of confidential friends. See above, on Ps. xxv. 14. Iv. 15 (14.) Ixiv. 3 (2.) Ixxxiii. 4 (3.) It is here applied to the church or chosen people, as constituting such a company or circle, in opposition to the world without. It is not therefore really distinct from the congregation mentioned in the last clause, but another name for it. The upright (or straightforivard) is a title given to the true Israel, from the days of Balaam downwards. See Num. xxiv   10.

2. Gieataretk. works of Jehovah^ sought {according)  to all
