<!-- psalm 112 | vol 3 | scan pages 120-121 -->

<!-- PAGE 120 -->
their desires. The common version of the last phrase, all them that have pleasure therein., supposes the text to be diflFerently pointed, as in Ps. xl. 15 (14,) Ixx. 3 (2.) The received text can only mean to (for or according to) all their wishes. The antecedent of the pronoun (their) seems to be the upright in v. 1. For a similar construction of the same pronoun, see below, on v. 10 The ckuse, thus construed, is obscure, but may be understood to mean, that when the works of God are sought out, investigated, or explored, their greatness fully satisfies the hopes and wishes of his people. Another possible sense is, that they are sought for, i. e. the experience or knowledge of them eagerly desired, with (literally as to) all their wishes, i. e. with avidity, or, as it is expressed in the preceding verse, with all the heart.

3. Honour and majesty (is) his work—and his righteousness standing forever. In the first clause, work is the subject of the proposition, honour and majesty the predicate. His work is honour and majesty, i. e. all that he does is noble and majestic, worthy of the great King, to whom these epithets are often applied elsewhere. See above, on Ps. civ. 1. His work means specifically here what he does for the protection and deliverance of his people. In the last clause, as in many other places, this work is referred to his righteousness, not his justice, in the technical and strict sense, but his rectitude, including his fidelity to his engagements, and securing the exercise of his covenanted mercy. This seems more natural than to explain it as meaning the practical justification of his people by his providential care of them. Standing to eternity (or perpetuity), not fitful or capricious, not confined or temporary, but perpetual and constant.

4. A memory has he made for his uwnderful works ; gracious and compassionate {is) Jehovah. The first clause, though no*, exactly rendered, is correctly paraphrased in the English I^ible, h. hath made his wonderful works to  be rememlercd, and  still more freely in the Prayer Book version. The last clauso ^hows that the wonderful works of the first are not the wonders cf creation, nor those of providence in general, but those wrought fo« the benefit of Israel. The terms of this clause are borrowed from Ex. xxxiv. 6.    See above, on Ps. ciii. 8.

<!-- PAGE 121 -->
5. Prey hath he given to those fearing him ; he will remember it eternity his covenant. The first word properly denotes the food of wild beasts, and may here be either a poetical equivalent to food., 'provision., as in Prov. xxxi. 15. Mai. iii. 10, or intended to suggest the additional idea of food obtained at the expense of enemies. In either case there seems to be no reason for restricting the clause to the supply of Israel in the desert, although that would necessarily occur to every reader, as the great historical example of the general fact alleged, and in the last clause represented as a proof of God's fidelity to covenant engagements.

6. The poiver of his works he has declared to his people, (so as) to give to them a heritage of nations. He has shown them what powerful things he can do, by favouring them so far as to drive out nations from their seats, and make his people their successors and, as it were, their heirs. This refers to the conquest of Canaan, as the first in a long series of such dispossessions, including all the territories gained in war from the surrounding nations, till the death of David. The construction of to give as a gerund (by giving) is not a Hebrew idiom, and restricts the meaning of the clause unduly.    See above, on Ps. Ixxviii. 18.

7. The ivor/is of his hands are truth and judgment; sure (are) all his precepts. The second clause is not an iteration of the first, but an inference from it. If what God does himself is always done in faithfulness and justice to his people, then what he requires them  to do must certainly be right and best, and his
