<!-- psalm 113 | vol 3 | scan pages 122-129 -->

<!-- PAGE 122 -->
requisitions therefore may be trusted and confided in, the true sense of the adjective or participle here employed.

8. Settled for ever and ever, done in truth and right. The subjects are the same as in v. 7, but presented in an inverse order, the first clause relating to the precepts^ the last to the works, of God. The former are settled, firmly supported, founded, or established, not capricious and precarious. The latter, by which they are recommended and attested (see above, on v. 9), are works of faithfulness and rectitude. The last word in Hebrew is an adjective used as a neuter or abstract noun, in which respect the English right resembles it.

9. Redemption he has sent to his people ; he has ordained to eternity his covenant ; holy and fearful is his name. That this verse was intended to consist of three clauses, is clear from the fact that it contains three letters of the alphabet in regular succession. The same thing is true of the remaining verse. The first clause relates mainly, not exclusively, to the deliverance from Egypt. As in V. 5, the second clause affirms a general truth, attested and exemplified by the particular fact mentioned in the first. Fearful, not merely to his foes but to his people, who can never cease to worship him with holy awe.

10. The beginning of wisdom is the fear of Jehovah ; a gooa understanding (is) to all (those) doing them ; his praise endurelh forever. This is the conclusion drawn from all that goes before. Since all God's dealings with his people are in faithfulness and truth, and his commands not only are but must be right, then the firsb step in wisdom, its first principle or element, is reverence for such a Being, proved by obedience to his will. The same sentiment occurs in Prov. i. 7. ix. 10. Job. xxviii. 28. The intimate connection of the verse, notwithstanding its proverbial or aphoristic form, with the foregoing context, is apparent from the refercnce of the pronoun them to the plural nouns of the preceding verses. Endureth j'orevci, literally, (is) standing to eternity. This is equivalent to saying that he will and must be praised forever, corresponding to the Hallelujah^ at the beginning of the psalm. PSALM    CXII.

<!-- PAGE 123 -->
Another alphabetical psalm of precisely the same character, coinciding with the one before it, even in the number of verses, and the number of clauses in each verse. This formal agreement shows the intimate connection of the two compositions, and makes it highly probable that they belong not only to the same age but to the same author, and were meant to form parts of one continued series or system. This psalm begins precisely where the one before it ends, i. e. with the happiness arising from the fear of God, v. 1, the blessed effects of which are then recounted under several particulars, vs. 2—9, and finally contrasted with the fate of the ungodly, v. 10.

1. Happij the man fearing Jehovah^ in his commandments delighting greatly. There is here not only an obvious connection with the close of the preceding psalm, but an obvious advance upon it or progression of ideas. As the fear of the Lord is there declared to be the principle of all true wisdom, so here it is declared to be the source of all true happiness. The second clause defines the meaning of the first by showing, that the fear there mentioned is a fear consistent with, or rather necessarily involving, a complacent acquiescence in Grod's will, thus entirely exclud- PSALM   CXI I. 115 ing a mere slavish dread, which is incompatible with such a disposition.

<!-- PAGE 124 -->
2. Mighty in the earth shall he his seed ; the race of the upright shall be blessed. The first phrase is borrowed from Gen. x. 8, and would at once suggest to every Hebrew reader the idea of a mighty man like Nimrod and the other ancient heroes. Now a promise of personal heroism is perhaps without analogy, especially as given to the son, to the exclusion of the father. This anomaly can be avoided only by assuming, what is probable enough in itself, that the ideal person here described represents the chosen people, the upright of the other clause, each successive generation of whom might be expected to excel its predecessors in heroic eminence.

3. Wealth and riches (are) in his house, and his righteousness endureth forever. Not only in his dwelling but in his family, so that his wealth or prosperity might have been said to endure forever as well as his righteousness, i. e. his recognition and reception as a righteous person, his justification. Endureth, literally, {is) standing, the same expression that is used in Ps. cxi. 3 of God himself. There is also an analogy, at least in form, between the majesty and honour of the righteous God and the wealth and riches of the righteous man.

4. There arises in the darkness light to the upright—kind and compassionate and righteous. The figure in the first clause is a natural and common one, denoting relief from deep distress. See above, on Ps. xcvii. 11. In the last clause we have another instance of the singular way in which terms applied to God in the preceding psalm are copied and applied to man in this. The first two epithets in this clause are employed above in Ps. cxi. 4. The principle involved may be the same as in Luke vi. 36, " be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is merciful." Compare Matt. V. 48. To these two epithets is added that of righteous^ in the wide sense including both the others. The construction of the sentence is unusual and doubtful; but most probably the second clause sustains the same relation to the other as in v. 1 , that is to say, it limits and defines the general description upright, by confining it to such as have the qualities expressed by the three adjectives that follow. The alternation of the numbers is familiar where the singular denotes an ideal individual including many real ones.

<!-- PAGE 125 -->
5. Happy the man showing favour and lending; he shall sus^ tain his affairs by justice. The first word in Hebrew, which means good^ is here descriptive not of character but of condition, and denotes good fortune. It is used in the same sense by Isaiah (iii. 10) and Jeremiah (xliv. 17.) The common version {a good man) is forbidden by the Hebrew collocation. Lending^ not as a financial or commercial operation, but as an act of charity, lending to the poor. The verb in the last clause strictly means to provide for or sustain, especially with food. See above, on Ps. Iv. 23.(22.) It is here applied to the control and management of all one's interests. Affairs^ literally, words^ but in the wider sense of that which words denote, namely, things, affairs, in which sense it is sometimes applied to causes or suits at law. The last word is commonly iranslaited judgment, not in the sense of discretion, given in the English versions, but in that of practical justice, righteous conduct. He shall best secure his own interests by treating those of others justly and generously.

6. For to eternity he shall not be moved; to the memory of eternity he shall be righteous. The for assigns the reason for his being pronounced happy. Moved, i. e. from his prosperous cou' dition, or from his position as a righteous man. The construction of the last clause in the English versions (the righteous shah be in everlasting remembrance) is grammatical, and yields a goot sense ; lut the latest interpreters prefer another, which makes to everlasling remembrance mean the same as to eternity. Aa long as he shall be remembered, he shall be remembered as a righteous man. This construction has the advantage of making the parallelism more exact.

<!-- PAGE 126 -->
7. From evil tidings he shall not fear ; fixed is his hearty trusting in Jehovah. The first Hebrew noun is in the singular number, and is properly a participle passive meaning heard, used absolutely as a noun denoting what is heard, a rumour or report, news or tidings. The common version {he shall not be afraid of evil tidings) seems to confine the negation to the mere apprehen- •sion or anticipation of bad news, whereas the original expression comprehends, and indeed more properly denotes, being frightened when the evil tidings are heard. A fixed heart is the negation both of fickleness and cowardice. See above, on Ps. li. 12 (10.) Ivii. 8 (7.) cviii. 1. Instead of the active participle trustingj the Hebrew has the passive trusted, analogous to that in Ps ciii. 14.

8. Settled (is) his heart, he shall not fear, until he look uvon his foes (with triumph.) The first word is another expression borrowed from the foregoing psalm, but applied in a manner altogether difi"erent. See Ps. cxi. 8, where the plural of the same participle is applied to God's commandments. The construction in the last clause is the idiomatic one of the verb see with the preposition in, which usually means to see with strong emotion, and especially with joy or triumph. See above, on Ps. 1. 23. liv. 9 (7.) Until does not imply that he shall then fear, but that there will then be no occasion so to do. See above, on Ps. ex. 1.

9. lie has scattered, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endureth forever, his hor% shall be high with honour.    The first 118 PSALM   CXI 11. verb denotes profuse munificence, as in Prov. xi. 34. This is alleged not as the cause but the effect, and therefore as the evidence of his being righteous. The next clause is the same as the last of V. 3. With the last clause compare Ps. Ixxv. 5 (4.) Ixxxix. IS (17.)

<!-- PAGE 127 -->
10. The wicked shall see and fret; his teeth he shall gnash^ and shall melt away ; the desire of the icicked shall perish. He shall see, but not with triumph or delight, like the righteous in v. 8. The word translated fret means both to grieve and be angry, and has no exact equivalent in English. See above, on Ps. vi. 8 (7.) X. 14, xxxi. 10 (9.) Gnash with his teeth, a strong expression of impotent malignity. See above, on Ps. xxxv. 16, xxxvii. 12. Melt away, literally, be melted, i. r. waste or decay. See above, on Ps. xxii. 15 (14.) Ixviii. 3 (2.) The desire of the wicked is his wish to see the righteous perish. Compare Prov. x. 24, 28. Job viii. 13, and the contrary promise to the humble, Ps. is. 19 (18.) PSALM   C X I I 1

The Psalmist celebrates the majesty of God, vs. 1krast with his gracious condescension to his suffering creatures, vs. 6—9. According to a Jewish usage, which appears to have existed even in the time of Christ, the six psalms beginning with this one constitute the Greater Hallel, sung at the annual festivals, especially the Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles. According to Hengstenberg's arrangement, this psalm closes a second trilogy, added to the Davidic one (Ps. cviii—ex) after the return from Babylon.

<!-- PAGE 128 -->
1. Hallelujah! Praise^ oh ye servants of Jehovah^ praise the name of Jehovah ! As the title, Servant of Jehovah^ is applied to eminent leaders of the chosen people (Ps. xviii. 1. xxxvi. 1. xc. 1. cv. 6), so the plural, Servants of Jehovah^ designates the chosen people itself. See above, Ps. xxxiv. 23 (22.) Ixix. 37 (36), and below, Ps. cxxxvi. 22, and compare Ezra v. 11. Neh. i. 10, from which last places it appears, that this was a familiar form of speech with the returned exiles.

2. Be the name of Jehovah blessed^ from now and even to eternity. In this as well as the preceding verse, the name of Jehovah involves the usual allusion to the manifestation of his nature in his former acts. See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) The wish expressed in this verse implies a perpetual continuation or renewal of the evidence already furnished.

3 From the rising of the sun even to its setting^ {to he) 'praised (is the) name of Jehovah. With the first clause compare Ps. 1. 1. The last clause might be grammatically construed as a wish, like that in the preceding verse, praised {be the) name of Jehovah. It is more probable, however, that the passive participle (landatiis) was meant to have the force of a gerundive {laudaitdus.) See above, on Ps. xviii. 4 (3.)

4. High above all nations (is) Jehovah ; above the heavens (is) hts (glory.) The two clauses are declaratory of his infinite superiority, both to the animate and inanimate creation, each beinorepresented by its noblest part; the former by mankind, and that considered not as individuals but nations ; the latter by the heavens. Thi^ is certainly more natural, and yields a better setise, than to give the preposition (b?) a difi"erent meaning in the two clauses, in the first that of above., in the second that of on^ in which case it is necessary to explain on heaven as meaning in heaven^ just as on the earth and in the earth are convertible expressions.    See above, on Ps. Ivii. 6 (5.)

<!-- PAGE 129 -->
5 Wlio is like Jehovah, our God, the (one) dwelling high > The verb denotes not merely dwelling, but sitting enthroned, sitting as a king. The original construction of the last clause is peculiar, the (one) making high to sit (or dwell.)

6. The one seeing deep—in heaven and in earth. The construction of the first clause is precisely the same with that of the last clause in v. .5, and must be explained in the same manner. As making high to dwell means dwelling high, so making low (or deep) to see must mean seeing deep, i. e. far below. It also follows from the exact correspondence of these clauses, that the remaining words of v. 6 are to be connected with the first words of V. 5.     Who is like Jehovah, our God in heaven and in earth ? The rest will then be read as a parenthesis. This construction is confirmed by the analogy of Deut. iii. 24.

7. Raising from the dust the poor—from the dunghill he will lift the needy. The mention of Grod's seeing far below him suggests the idea of his condescension to the humblest objects which he thus beholds. The word translated poor is one of wide signification, meaning sometimes poor in flesh and sometimes poor in purse. See above, on Ps. xli. 2 (\.) The parallel term means foor in the strict sense, i. e. needy, destitute. Dust and dungkill, common figures in all languages for a degraded social state. The terms are borrowed from the prayer of Hannah, 1 Sam. ii. 8. Compare Ps. xliv. 26 (25.)

8. To make him sit with nobles, with the nobles of his people, Not merely to dwell, which is too vague, but to sit with them, •a? their equal and associate.   There is also a climax in the last clause
