<!-- psalm 114 | vol 3 | scan pages 130-133 -->

<!-- PAGE 130 -->
He not only raises the poor to an equality with nobles in o-oneral but with the nobles of his people, i. e. with the noblest of mankind.    See again, 1 Sam. ii. 8.

9. Making the barren (one) of the house to sit a joyful mother of children. Hallelujah ! The common version {to keep house) is founded upon Ps. Ixviii. 7(6), but is here at variance both with Hebrew usage and the masoretic accents, which require (tTi?5) ^^^'^^^ and (n";sn) the house to be closely united in construction, as above. The form of expression is like one in Ps. Ixviii. 13 (12.) To sit might be rendered to dioell without any material change of sense ; but the former keeps up the uniformity with Vs. 5, 8, where the same Hebrew word is used. The historical allusion is to Hannah who, with other long childless mothers mentioned in the sacred history, was a type of the Church in its low estate, and more especially in exile. Compare Isai 'iv. 1. PSALMCXIY.

As the preceding psalm encouraged the people of God, in & ime of trial, by reminding them that, although infinitely exalted^ le condescends to notice and relieve the suflferings of his creatures, so the one before us is intended to produce the samr effect, by bringing to their recollection what he actually did for Israel in the period of the exodus from Egypt. By that deliver ance he acknowledged Israel as his chosen people, vs. 1, 2, and attested the acknowledgment by miracle, vs. 3, 4.    Nature hox VQL.   III. 6     ' self, whose course was interrupted, is appealed to as a witness, vs. 5, G, that she is subject to the God of Israel, vs. 7, 8. There is no improbability in the opinion that this psalm, with those which immediately follow, was intended to continue the series begun in the two preceding trilogies (Ps. cviii—ex, cxi—cxiii), and intended to sustain the hopes of the Jewish Church after its return from Babylon.

<!-- PAGE 131 -->
1. In the coming forth of Israel from Egypt^ of thfi house of lacoh from a people of strange language. The first phrase is not to be restricted to the very act or moment of the exodus, but comprehends the whole Mosaic period, of which this was the characteristic and critical event. The house of Jacoh is a phrase peculiarly appropriate to those who entered Egypt as a family, and left it as a nation. Of strange language is a paraphrase of one Hebrew word, apparently a participle and occurring only here ; but according to its obvious etymological affinities, it probably means stammering, and then, by an association common in antiquity, speaking barbarously, i. e. in a foreign language. Ah such expressions may perhaps involve an allusion to the preeminence of Hebrew, as the primitive and sacred language. If was no small part of the humiliation to which Israel was subjected in Egypt, that the people of God should sustain for ages a relation of dependence to a nation who did not even speak the sacred language, much less profess the true religion, so inseparably blended with it. See above, on Ps. Ixxxi. 6 (5), and compare my note on Isai. xxxiii. 19.

2. Judah became his sanctuary., Israel his dominion. Judah is put as an equivalent to Israel, not only because it had really become so when the psalm was written, but because it was destined to become so from the first. See Gen. xlix. 10. Became., literally, 'Loas for., which might mean nothing more than served as or was treated as; but this construction cf the verb to be with to or PSALM cxrv. 123 for IS the only representative in Hebrew of our -vvord ^ecomt. The sense thus obtained is entirely consistent with the callinf» of Abraham, because what is here meant is that Israel, as a nation, was now publicly declared to be the chosen or peculiar people, an idea expressed by the phrase his sanctuary or holy things i. e. something set apart exclusively to his use and service. The parallel word in the original is plural, dominions or domains^ in reference, as some suppose, to the plurality of tribes, but according to others, in contrast with the lordships and dominions of the world, to all which Israel is described as more than equipollent, just as the infinite superiority of the true God to all false gods is expressed or suggested by the plural name Elohim. Here, as in Ps. Ixxxvii. 1, the pronouns are without an antecedent in the sentence. The reference to Grod is so self-evident, that the only question has respect to the unusual form, which some explain by supposing that the psalm was originally part of the preceding one, or at least designed to be always read or sung directly after it. The latest interpreters prefer the explanation, that the name of God was designedly suppressed, in order that the questions in vs. 5, 6, might appear more natural and yet more striking.

<!-- PAGE 132 -->
3. The sea saw and Jled—the Jordan turns hack. By oiipposing the conversive prefix to afiect both verbs, we may render the last also as a preterite, turned hack. The historical allusion is to Ex. xiv. 21. Josh. iii. 14—17. At the same time, as seas and rivers are familiar emblems of the world and its nations, the reminiscence is adapted to suggest the hope, that other seas and other rivers may be yet controlled by the same power. Ses above, on Ps. Ixxvii. 17 (16.) xciii. 3. cvii. 23.

4. The mountains skipped like ramSj (the) hills like the young oj sheep. As the Psalmist is reciting actual events, to be used as pymbols and pledges of others, this cannot be exp.ained as a poetical figure, but must be understood as referring to the concus- 124 PSALM   CXI V. sion of Sinai, with its various peaks and neighbouring mountains Se« Ex. xix. IS. Judg. v. 4. Ps. Ixviii. 9 (8.) xcvii. 4, 5. Hab. rii. 6. Here again, the familiar use of mountains to denote statea and empires is suggestive of the same consolation as in v. 3.

<!-- PAGE 133 -->
6. What ailcth thee^ oh sea, thai thou Jicest—oh Jordan (ihaf) thou turnest back ? By a fine poetical apostrophe, the Psalmist, instead of simply stating the cause of these effects, puts the question to the natural objects which thus witnessed and attested the divine presence. The first phrase literally means, what (is) to thee, the nearest approach that the Semitic dialects can make to our expression, ivhat have you, which in some languages, the French for instance, is the usual equivalent to what ails you 1

6. Ye mountains, (that) ye skip like rams—ye hills, likethe young of sheep 1 The sentence is continued from the foregoing verse, being still dependent on the question there asked. In^this interrogation the terms of vs. 3, 4, are studiously repeated. The young of sheep, literally, sons of the flock.

7. From before the Lord trcmble^oh earth, from before the God of Jacob. As in other cases of rhetorical interrogation, the writer or speaker answers his own question. The imperative mood is here peculiarly significant, including both a recollection and prediction ; as if he had said, the earth might well tremble at the presence of the Lord, and may well tremble at it still. From before is better than at the presence of, because the very form of the expression necessarily suggests the ideas of recoil and flight. Before is itself a compound term in Hebrew, meaning to the fau of. The word translated Lord is the simple or primitive form of Adhonai, and is applied both to God «ind man, in the sense of lord or master.    See Ex. xxiii. 17. Mai. iii. 1.

8. Turning the rock (into) a pool of water, the fiint to springs
