<!-- psalm 115 | vol 3 | scan pages 134-135 -->

<!-- PAGE 134 -->
of water. This refers to the miraculous supply of crater in tlic desert. See above, on Ps. cvii. 35, and compare Ei. xvii. 6 Num. XX. 11. Dcut. viii. 15. xxxii. 13. Isai. xli. 18 The connection with the preceding verse is still more marked in the original, the first words of which strictlj mean the (one) turnings etc. The reader is left to draw for himself the natural and obvious conclusion, that the God, who thus drew water from a flinty rock for the supply of Israel, can still educe the richest blessings from what seem to be the hardest and most inauspicious situations. When this thought is supplied, the psdm no longer seems unfinished or abrupt in its conclusion. PSALM    C X Y .

Go J is entreated by his people to vindicate not their honour but his own, vs. 1, 2, which is contrasted with the impotence of idols and their worshippers, vs. 3—8, and urged as a reason why his people should trust in him, for a large increase, vs. 9—15, and a fulfilment of his purpose to glorify himself by the praises of the living not the dead, vs. 16—17, in the promotion of which end the church declares her resolution to co-operate forever, v. 18. The general tenor of the psalm, thus stated, and its particular contents, make it perfectly well suited to the state of things in which the series is supposed to have been written, namely, that succeeding the return from exile, but before the actual rebuilding of the temple.

1. Not unto ?/s, Jehovah., not unto us^ hut to thy name give 126 FSALM   CXV. glory^ for thy mercy^ for thy truth. The glory meant is not that of former but of future deeds. The implied petition is, that God would interpose for the deliverance of his people, not to do them honour but to glorify himself, and especially to vindicate his mercy and fidelity, which seemed to be dishonoured by his desertion of the chosen people. See above, on Ps. Ixxix. 9, and compare Num. xiv. IS.Lsai. xliii. 7,25. xlviii. 9, II. Dan. ix. 18 The favour sought is the completion of the work of restoration, still imperfect, though auspiciously begun.

<!-- PAGE 135 -->
2. Why should the nations say^ Where now is tJidr God? Why should they have occasion so to ask f The form of expression is borrowed from Ps. Ixxix. 10, with the addition of (j*5) now, which is not a particle of time, but of entreaty, or, in this connection, of triumphant demand. Where^ pray^ is their God? This verse is explanatory of the one before it, by showing that there really was need of something to silence the reproaches of the heathen, a description exactly corresponding to the state of the Jews at the Restoration.

3. And our God (is) in heaven; all that he fleasexl he has done. The aTul^ though foreign from our idiom, adds sensibly to the force of the expression. They ask thus, as if our God were absent or had no existence ; and yet all the while our God is in heaven, in his glorious and exalted dwelling-place. Compare Ps. ii. 4. xi. 4. ciii. 19. The same phrase, but in the future tense, is used by Solomon (Ecc. viii. 3.) The same idea is expressed in other words, Gen. xviii. 14. Job. xxiii. 13.

4. Their idols {are) silver and gold, the work of the hands of man. Here begins the contrast between the true God and all others, lyieir idols., those of the Gentiles, who reproach us with the absence or indifference of our God. For the associations coupled with   the   wcird for   idols,   see  above, on  Ps.  cvi. 38
