<!-- psalm 116 | vol 3 | scan pages 136-139 -->

<!-- PAGE 136 -->
Hands of vian^ not of a vian^ but of maiiJiitid^ i. e. human hands With this whole passage compare Isai. xl. 18—20. xli. 7. xliv. 9—20. xlvi. 5—7. Jer. ii. 28. x. 3—15.

5. They have a mouth and speak not ; they have eyes and see not As the verb to have is wanting in the Hebrew and its cognate languages (see above, on Ps. cxiv. 5), it is not a literal translation of the original expression, (there is) a mouth to them^ (there are) eyes to them. The futures include not only a simple affirmation, they speak not, they see not, but the future and potential sense, they never will or can speak or see.

6. They have ears and hear not, they have a nose and smell not. The antithesis is that expressed in Ps. xciv. 9, that God is the former of the eye and the planter of the ear in man ; much more then can he see and hear himself.

7. They have hands and feel not; they have feet and walk not; they do not mutter in their throat. The sameness of this long enumeration, the force of which is logical and not poetical, is partially relieved by a change in the form of the original, which cannot well be imitated in translation. Their hands, and they feel not; their feet, and they loalk not. Some make the first words in each clause nominatives absolute; their hands—they feel not; their feet—they walk not. But in the preceding parts of the description, the verbs relate not to the particular members, but to the whole person. It is better, therefore, to supply a verb—their hands (are there) and (yet) they feel not—their feet (are there) and (yet) they go not. The English feel is to be taken in its physical and outward sense, corresponding tc the Latin palpo, here used by the Vulgate and Jerome. A less equivocal translation would be touch. The other verb denotes all progressive movements of the body, comprehended in the English go.    See above, on Ps. civ. 3.    The meaning of the last clause 128 PSALM   CX 7. is, that they cannot even make the faintest and most inarticulate guttural noise, like the lower animals; much less speak as men do.    See above, on Ps. xxxv. 28. Ixxi. 24.

<!-- PAGE 137 -->
8. Like them shall he those who make them, every one who trusts in them. The last clause forbids the application of the first to the mere artificers, as such, and fastens it on those v^ho trust in idols, whether made by them or by others for them. However formidable now, they shall hereafter be as powerless and senseless as the gods they worship. The translation are is contrary to Hebrew usage, which requires the present tense of the substantive verb to be suppressed.

9. Oh Israel^ trust thou in Jehovah ; their help and their shield [is) He. This is the practical application of the contrast just presented. Since idols are impotent and God almighty, it is folly to fear them or their servants; it is worse than folly not to trust in Him. The last clause is borrowed from Ps. xxxiii. 20. After addressing Israel directly in the first clause, he resumes the third person in the second, and, as if speaking to himself, assigns the reason for the exhortation. The first clause is, as it were, uttered in a loud voice, and the second in a low one.

10. Oh house of Aaron, trust ye in Jehovah; their help and their shield {is) He. Before the exile this particular address to the priests would have been surprising. It is perfectly natural, however, after the return from Babylon, when the priests bore so large a proportion, not only to the other levites, but to the whole nation, and naturally exercised a paramount influence in its affairs.

11. Fearers of Jehovah^ trust ye in Jehovah; their Mp and their shield (is) He. He turns again to the people at large, who lire here described as fearers of Jehovah, not in reference to th^ PSALM   exV. 129 actual character of all the individual raembers, but to the high vocation of the body.    See above, Ps. xxii. 24 (23.) cxi. 5.

<!-- PAGE 138 -->
12. Jehovah hath remcTTibtred us ; he will blesSy he ivill hless i/ie house of Israel; he toill bless the house of Aaron. The exhortation to confide in God does not imply that he has yet done nothing. He has already shown his gracious recollection of us by beginning to bless us, and he will still go on to bless us; an idea simply but beautifully expressed by the repetition of the verb, the effect of which is spoiled in the common version by needlessly supplying us

13. He will bless the fearers of Jehovah, the small with the great. There is no need of explaining the great to be the priests and the small the laity. It is much more natural to understand this as an instance of a common Hebrew idiom, which combines small and great in the sense of all., just as neither good nor evil means neither one thing nor another, i. e nothing. Compare 2 Kings xviii. 24. Jcr. xvi. 6. Rev. xiii. 16. xix. 6.

14. May Jehovah add to you, to you and to your children ! This implies a previous diminution of the people, such as really took place in the Babylonish exile. The optative meaning of the verb, both here and in Gen. xxx. 24, is clear from Dent. i. 11. 2. Sam. xxiv. 3. The Hebrew preposition strictly means wpon you, and conveys the idea of accumulation much more stronf^ly. See above, on Ps. Ixxi. 14, where we have an example of the same construction.

15. Blessed are ye of Jehovah, Maker of heaven and earth. Ye are the people blessed of old in the person of your father Abraham, by Melchizedek, priest of the Most High God, saying, " Blessed be Abraham of the Most High God, creator of heaven and earth," Gen. xiv. 19. Of Jehovah, literally,/o Jehovah, as an object of benediction to him.    Or the Hebrew preposition, as in many other cases, may be simply equivalent to our by. The creative character of God is mentioned, as ensuring his ability, DO less than his willingness, to bless his people.

<!-- PAGE 139 -->
16. The heavens (are) heavens fat Jehovah^ and the earth he has given to the sons of man. This verse suggests another reason why God would increase them, namely, that although he reserved heaven for himself, he designed the earth to be filled and occupied by man, and hence in the primeval blessing on mankind, as originally uttered, and as repeated after the flood (Gen i. 28. ix. 1), the command to increase is coupled with that to fill the earth. Now if it is not God's will that the race should be diminished and reduced to nothing, much less can such be his intention with respect to his own people. The form of expression in the first clause is unusual. The construction given in the English Bible {the heaven, even the heavens^ are the Lordh) is entirely gratuitous, the distinction of numbers (heaven, heavens), and the emphatic even, being both supplied by the translators. The Hebrew word is plural in both cases, and is indeed used only in that number.

17. (It is) not the dead (that) are to praise Jah, and not all (those) going down to silence. This may be regarded as a further reason for expecting the divine protection. God has chosen a people, from among the nations of the earth, to praise him,not when dead but living, not in the silence of the grave, but with their voices in the present life. Thus understood, the verse teaches nothing as to the employments of the disembodied spirit, or of soul and body in the future state. All that is afi&rmed here (and perhaps in other places like it) is that the praises of the chosen people, as such, must be limited to this life. See abovti, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) XXX. 10 (9.) Ixxxviii. 11—13 (10—12), and compare Isai. xxxviii. IS. Silence, a poetical description of the gravo or the unseen world, as in Ps. xciv. 17.
