<!-- psalm 117 | vol 3 | scan pages 140-145 -->

<!-- PAGE 140 -->
IS. And (therefore) we will bless Jah from now even tn eferm'ty. Hallelujah! As it is not the dead who are to do it, and as we are still preserved alive, let us answer our vocation and the very end of our existence. The insensible transition from temporal to eternal praise is altogether natural. The hallelujah refers back to the expression praise Jah (ychallelujah) in v. 17. As if he had said : let us do what the dead can not, shout Hallelujah ! PSALM   CXYI.

The Church declares her resolution to praise Jehovah for the deliverance which she has experienced, vs. 1, 2, and which is then described with some particularity, vs. 3—10, followed by a declaration of the way in which the Church means to express her gratitude, vs. 11—19. The Septuarrint and Vulgate, which combine the two preceding psalms as one, divide the one before us into two, with as little reason in the one case as the other. The state of things referred to in this psalm, as one of mingled joy and grief, and its peculiarities of language, all combine to fix its date immediately after the return from Babylon.

1. I love—because Jehovah hears my voice, my supplications. The common version gives the sense correctly, but by a transposition of Jehovah, avoidss the singular peculiarity of form in the original. The object of the verb J love is easily supplied from the remainder of the sentence. Compare Ps. xviii. 2 (1.) Dcut. vi. 5. Both verbs may be translated in the present, though of different tenses in the Hebrew.    The preterit© form of the first 132 PSALM   CX VI. (7 have loved) implies that the occasion had ah-eadj been afforded the future form of the second (he will hear)^ that it was con-« tinned and would be continued.    The last word, according to ita etymology, means prayers for grace or favour. •

<!-- PAGE 141 -->
2. For he has inclined his car to me, and in my days I will call O.ipon him.) The original idea of the figure in the first clause seems to be that of leaning forward to catch a sound otherwise too faint to be distinctly audible. See above, on Ps. xxxi. 3 (2), and compare Ps. xvii. 6. Ixxi. 2. Ixxviii. 1. cii. 3. In my days is commonly understood to mean through all the days of my life, or as long as I live. Compare Isai. xxxix. 8, and sec above, on Ps. civ. 33. 1 will call might be understood to mean, I will still pray to him who has hitherto answered my petitions. But to call upon God is applied not only to prayer but to thanksgiving, as appears from v. 13 below, where indeed we have the execution of the purpose here avowed.

3. T/ie hands of death enclosed me, and the pangs of hell found me ; distress and grief I find. Here begins the description of the sufferings from which God had delivered him. The expressions are borrowed from Ps. xviii. 5, 6, (4, 5.) The twofold use of the yevh find in this verse is analogous to that of the synonymous verbs catch and seize in English, when a man is said tc catch a disease, and the disease is said to seize the man. Compare Ps. -cxix. 143 with Prov. vi. 33. Hell, in the wide sense corresponding to s/ieol, the grave, death, or the state of the dead. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.)

4. And on the name of Jehovah I call: ah now, Jehovah, de» liver my soul! The future in the first clause may be strictly translated (i will call) as expressing the determination which ha formed in the midst of his distress. See above, on Ps. xviii. 5, 7 (4, 6.)    Ah now corresponds exactly, both in origin and mean* mg, to the intensive particle of entreaty (ns&5 for j<::5^ from rTJ;^ and j^5)j which the common version ^a^rsi-phrtises, I beseech tkce. One of the elements of which it is compounded occurs above, Ps. cxv. 2.

<!-- PAGE 142 -->
5. Gracious (is) Jehovah and righteous^ and our God shoia pity. With the first clause compare Ps. cxi. 4. cxii. 4. The last word in Hebrew is the active participle of the verb to pity^ to compassionate., and is here used to denote a habit as distinguished from a momentary feeling.

6. A preserver of the simple {is) Jehovah; I was brought low, and to me he brought salvation. Here again the first word is an active participle, keeping the simple., i. e. habitually watching over them. For the meaning of the simple., see above, on Ps. xix. 8 (7.) The word brought^ twice used in translating this verse, has nothing distinctly corresponding to it in the Hebrew, but by a fortuitous coincidence, enters into two English phrases, by which the original verbs may best be represented. The verb translated brought low means to be reduced, in person, streno-th, or circumstances. See above, on Ps. Ixxix. 8, and compare the cognate adjective in Ps. xli. 2 (1.) The other is the common Hebrew verb to save., here expressed by a circumlocution, for the purpose of retaining the original construction with the preposition to., which also occurs above, Ps. Ixxii. 4. Ixxxvi. 16.

7. Retur^i., oh my soul., unto thy rest, for Jehovah hath bestowed upon thee (favour.) By calling on his soul, which had been agitated and alarmed, to return to its repose, he implies the cessation of the danger. Rest., literally, rests or resting-places., implying fulness or completeness of repose. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 2. For the sense and usage of (b^3) the last verb, see above, on Ps. xiii. 6 (5), and compare Ps. vii. 5 (4.) ciii, 10. The unusual grainmatieal forms in this verse are similar to those in Ps. ciii. 2, 5. 134 PSALM   C XVI,

<!-- PAGE 143 -->
8. For thou hast delivered my soul from death, my eye from tceeping, my foot from falling. By a sudden apostrophe, God is now addressed directly. The first and last members of the sentence are borrowed from Ps. Ivi. 14 (13.) The second bears some resemblance to Ps. Ivi. 9 (8) and Jer. xxxi. 16.

9. I will walk before Jehovah in the land of life (or of the liv' ing.) This is also borrowed from Ps. Ivi. 14 (13), with the substitution of land (literally lands) for light. Compare Ps. xxvii. 13. The hope here expressed is in contrast with Ps. cxv. 17.

10. I believed, for (thus) / speak; I was afflicted greatly. I must have exercised faith, or I could not thus have spoken. The Septuagint version, retained in the New Testament (2 Cor. iv. 13), clothes the same essential meaning in a different form, I believed, therefore have Isic^'en. It was because his faith enabled him to speak, so that hii ? peaking was a proof of faith.

11. I said rt Jn j terror, All mankind {arc) false. The form of expression in tV. first clause is borrowed from Ps. xxxi. 23 (22.) But instead of being a confession of error it is here rather a profession of faith. Even in the midst of his excitement, terror, panic, he could turn away from all human aid and trust in God alone. The proposition, all mankind are false, i. e. not to be trusted or relied upon, implies as its complement or converse, therefore God alone is to be trusted. See the same contrast stated more explicitly in Ps. cxviii. 8, and compare Ps. Ixii. 9, 10 (8, 9.) cviii. 13 (12.) cxlvi. 3, 4.

12. How shall I requite to Jehovah all his bestowmenfs upon me. Between this verse and that before it, we must supply the thought that his faith was rewarded and justified by the event. This is indeed implied in the interrogation now before us.    How, liter ftlly what^ i. e. {in) what (way)^ or (by) what (means) ? See Gen. xliv. 16. The unusual word hestoiomcnts is here used to represent a Hebrew one occurring only here, but evidently formed from the verb (w?pa) to confer or bestow upon, employed in v. 7 above. The peculiar form both of the noun and pronoun (%'7ii^?03rii is regarded by the highest philological authorities as fixing the date of the composition after the Captivity.

<!-- PAGE 144 -->
13. The cup of salvations I ivill take up, and on the name of Jehovah will call. This is commonly explained by a reference to the Jewish tradition of a cup of thanksgiving which accompanied or followed the thank-offerings. But we read of no such cup in Scripture, and its origin may probably be traced to the rabbinical interpretation of this very passage. Interpreted by Scriptural analogies it simply means, I will accept the portion God allots me. For this figurative use of cup, see above, on Ps. xi. 6. xvi. 5. The plural form, salvations^ denotes fulness or completeness, as in Ps. xviii. 52 (51.) liii. 7 (6.) Take up^ as if from the table where the hand of God has placed it; or lift up^ towards heaven, as a gesture of acknowledgment.

14. My vows to Jehovah will I pay—in the presence of all his people. The word now^ in the common version, misleads the English reader, who can scarcely fail to understand it as an adverb of time, meaning at present.^ immediately^ icithout delay^ whereas it is the particle of entreaty {^"i) used in Ps. cxv. 2, and here employed to modify the bold avowal of a purpose, by making it dependent on divine permission. As if he had said: my vows to Jehovah I will pay—let me do it in the presence CI entreat) of all his people. The same meaning is attached by some to the augmented or paragogic form of the word translated presence., and which strictly means the front or forepart. Both these peculi' arities are reckoned among the indications of a later age of Ho brew composition. 136 PSALiM   CXVI.

<!-- PAGE 145 -->
15. Precious in the eyes of Jehovah (is) the death of his gracioui ones (or saints.) The idea and expression are borrowed from Ps. Ixxii. 14, where the same thing is said of their blood. Tho word for death has the same peculiarity of form as that for presence in v. 14, and is construed in the same way with the preposition io^ the death to his saints^ i. e. the death belonging to them, which they die. These are regarded by the critics as additional tokens of the age in which the psalm was written. The verse assigns the reason for the preceding vow, to wit, that God counts the death of his people too costly to be lightly or gratuitously suffered.

16. Ah now Jehovah—for I {am) thy servant.^ I {am) thy servant, the son of thy handmaid ; thou hast loosed my bonds. The expression of entreaty at the beginning has reference to some thing not expressed, though easily supplied, namely permission thus to testify his gratitude. Ah now Lord (suffer me thus to do) for I am thy servant, etc. The additional phrase, son of thy handmaid., is much stronger than thy servant., and describes him as a home-born slave. Sec above, on Ps. ixxxvi. 16. In the last clause we have another instance of a preposition (b) interposed between the active verb and its object, in a way unknown to the older Hebrew. It is possible, however, to translate the words, thou hast freed {m.e) as to (i, e. fromj ?ny bonds.

17. 7^0 thee will I sacrifice a sacrifice of thanks, and on the name of Jehovah will I call. The sense is not, I will offer thanks instead of an oblation, but an oblation really expressive of thanksgiving and appointed for that purpose.

IS. My vows to Jehovah will I pay in the presence (I entreat; of all his people. An exact repetition of v. 14, with all its singu* larities of form.
