<!-- psalm 120 | vol 3 | scan pages 208-212 -->

<!-- PAGE 208 -->
form of the original, seem to make the primary idea that of sin, which is really included, but only as the cause of that which is directly intended, namely misery, represented by the wandering of a lost and helpless sheep. Compare Jer. 1. 6. Seek thy servant^ deliver from this wretched state one who is still thy servant, and as such remembers thy commandments, even in the midst of his worst sufferings. As the preceding verse sums up the petitions of the psalm, so this sums up its complaints in the first clause and its professions in the last, connected by the short prayei {seek thy servant) as by a single link. The predominant use of the past tense, even to the end, shows how deeply the entire psalm is founded upon actual and previous experience. In this last stanza, the only initial word repeated is (^^^j) the verb of existence. PSALM   CXX.

1. A Song of the Ascents. To Jehovah^ in my distress^ I called, and he answered me. This is the first of fifteen psalms (cxx —cxxxiv ) ill bearing the inscription, song of ascents or upgoings, i. e sung during the periodical journeys or pilgrimages to Jerusalem at the times of the great yearly festivals. On these occasions the people are said, even in historical prose, to go up to Jerusalem, in reference both to its physical and moral elevation. See Ex. xxxiv. 24. 1 Kings xii. 27, 28. The Hebrew verb (n)5J) employed in such connections is the root of the noun (nibl^.JQ) ascents in these inscriptions. This explanation of the title is much more satisfactory than any other which has been proposed. A rabbinical tradition represents these psalms as having been sung by the SOO PSALM   CXX. people, as they ascended the fifteen steps (in Hebrew ln'i'b.2?^; seven on one side and eight on the other, repeatedly mentioned by Ezekiel (xl. 6, 22, 26, 31, 34, 37.) But apart from the intrinsic improbability of this tradition, some psalms in the series were evidently not meant to be sung at the temple. No less improbable than this very ancient explanation is the modern one, that the inscription has reference to a peculiarity of structure, the repetition of a phrase or clause of one sentence in the next with an addition, forming a kind of climax or progression in the terms as well as the ideas. But CTcn admitting that this peculiarity of form might be described by (fn^sj?^) the Hebrew word in question, this word could not have been prefixed to each of the fifteen psalms, when the examples of the fact alleged are confined almost exclusively to one or two of them. Much nearer to the truth is the opinion, that these psalms were intended to be sung during the return from Babylon, which is called an ascent iV\b'S)2\ by Ezra (vii. 9.) But this can only be maintained by arbitrarily denying the genuineness of the titles, which ascribe four of the psalms (cxxii, cxxiv, cxxxi, cxxxiii) to David and one (cxxvii) to Solomon. The position assigned to these, and the difference of tone between them and the rest, are ingeniously ac« counted for by Hengstenberg's hypothesis, that these five ancienv psalms, sung by the people, as they went up to Jerusalem, before the captivity, were made the basis of a whole series or system, designed for the same use by an inspired writer after the Restoration, who not only added ten psalms of his own, as appears from the identity of tone and diction, but joined them to the old ones in a studied and artificial manner, entirely inconsistent with the supposition of fortuitous or random combination. The one psalm by Solomon stands in the centre of the series or system and divides it into two equal parts, in each of which we find two psalms of David and five anonymous or new ones, the former being separated and surrounded by the latter, an additional and strong proof of intended adaptation to the times when the later psalms were written, to whicL Hengstenberg still further adds the number and distribution of the divine names in the whole series and its subdivisions. The psalm immediately before is anonymous, but its tone and diction mark it as belonging to the period of the Restoration. It begins with an acknowledgment of that great mercy, v. 1, followed by a prayer for deliverance from treacherous and spiteful enemies, v. 2, and a confident anticipation of their punishment, vs. 3, 4, but closes with a further lamentation and complaint of present suffering, vs. 5—7. In this, as in all the other psalms of the series, the ideal speaker is Israel or Judah, considered as the church or chosen people. This first verse, although general in its terms, is perfectly appropriate to the Captivity, as the distress out of which the sufferer cried to God, and to the Kestoration, as the answer to his prayer. In my distress^ literally, in distress to me^ an expression like that in Ps. xviii. 7 (6.) The augmented form of the Hebrew noun is like that in Ps. iii. 3 (2.)

<!-- PAGE 210 -->
2. Oh Jehovah^ free my soul from lip of falsehood, from tongue of fraud. The soul is particularly mentioned as usual when the life or the existence is in danger. The last two nouns in Hebrew are not in construction but in apposition, a tongue (ivhich is) fraud, equivalent in meaning to the same English words in an inverted order, fraud-tongue. See a somewhat similar combination, Ps. xlv. 5 (4.),lx. 5 (4.) The terms of the description are too strong to be applied to mere delusive promises, and necessarily suggest the idea of calumnious falsehood, as in Ps. xxxi. 19 (18.) cxix. 69, 78. The reality answering to this description in the case of the restored Jews is the spiteful misrepresentation, by which the Samaritans retarded the rebuilding of the temple, as recorded in the fourth chapter of Ezra.

3. What will he give to thee, and what will he add to thee, thou tongue of fraud ? Having complained to God of the false tongue, the ideal speaker turns to it as actually present and ad- 9* dresses it directly, speaking of God in the third person The meaning of the question is, what recompense can you expect from an infinitely righteous God for these malignant calumnies ? The peculiar form of the interrogation is derived from that of an ancient oath, The Lord do so to me and more aho^ literally, arid so addj i. e. further do, or in addition to the thing in question. See 1 Sam. iii, 17. xiv. 44. As explained by this allusion, the words have a new force. What good or evil may be imprecated on thee, as the consequence of these malicious falsehoods ?

<!-- PAGE 211 -->
4. Arroivs of a warrior sharpened, (together) with coah of j'ltniper. The general idea of severe and painful punishment is here expressed by the obvious and intelligible figures of keen arrows and hot coals. The arrows of a mighty man, warrior, or hero, are those used in battle, perhaps with an allusion to the fact, that one of the races mentioned in the next verse excelled in archery. See Isai. xxi. 17. The word which the rabbinical tradition explains to mean the juniper, is by modern lexicographers identified with the Arabic name of a species of broomplant, which is thought, on account of its inflammatory quality, to make the best charcoal. See Robinson's Palestine, vol. i. p. 299. With the figures of the verse before us compare Ps. vii. 14 (13.) xviii. 13, 14 (12, 13.) cxl. 11 (10.)

5. Alas for me, that I sojourn (with) Meshech (and) dwell near the tents of Kedar ! The first verb seems elsewhere, in the same construction, to denote the act of dwelling with one, Ps. v. 6 (4.) The Hebrew preposition in the last clause properly means with and denotes association and proximity. The English Bible, by twice employing our preposition in, obscures the meaning of both clauses, which is not that the people were in the power or even in the midst of the enemies here mentioned, but compelled to reside near them and to suffer from their neighbourhood.    Meshech is the name given in Gen. x. 2 to the Moschi, a barbarous people inhabiting the mountains between Colchis, Armenia, and Iberia. Kedar was one of the sons of Ishmael, (Gen. XXV. 13), whose name is sometimes used to designate an Arabian tribe (Isai. xxi. 16. xlii. 11 J, and in later Hebrew the Arabians generally. As these races, dwelling far off, in the north and south, were never in immediate or continued contact with the Israelites, they are probably named as types and representatives of warlike barbarism, just as the names Groths, Vandals, Huns, Turks, Tartars, Cossacks, have at different times been used proverbially in English, to describe those supposed to exhibit the same character, however unconnected or remote in genealogy and local habitation. A slight approach to the same usage was produced among ourselves by the revolutionary war, in reference to the national names, British and Hessian. In the case before us, it is evident from v. 6, that Meshech and Kedar are mere types and representatives of those who hate peace and delight in war. Compare Ezek. xxxviii. 2, where Meshech appears as a chief leader under Gog, the great prophetic representative of heathendom.

<!-- PAGE 212 -->
6. My soul has dwelt too long for her with (oneJ hating peace. The substitution of my soul for /implies the intimate conviction and the painful sense of what is here asserted. Too long, literally, much or too much. As to this peculiar idiom, see above, on Ps. Ixv. 10 {9.) For her may be an idiomatic pleonasm, adding nothing to the meaning of the verb, with which it must be read in close connection ; or it may have the meaning which the corresponding phrase would naturally seem to have in English, for her good or for her interest. See above on Ps. Iviii. 8 (7.) Hating peace is clearly a collective or aggregate expression, comprehending all denoted by the Meshech and Kedar of the preceding verse, as an ideal individual. 7   / am peace, and when I speak, they (go) to war     The first phrase resembles I am 'prayer in Ps. cix. 4, and seems to mcan,l am all peace, nothing but peace, peace itself, i. e. entirely peaceful or pacific. Speak may be an ellipsis for apeak peacCj a phrase repeatedly occurring in the Psalms. See above, Ps. XXXV. 20. Ixxxv. 9 (8), and below, Ps. cxxii. 8. The sense will then be, whenever I desire or propose peace. If the verb be absolutely understood, the sense is that every word he utters ia made an occasion of attack or conflict. The double for, in the common version of this sentence, is as incorrect as the double in of V. 5, and more enfeebling to the sense. I am not only for peace, but am peace itself. They are not only/or war, but arise, proceed, or address themselves to it.
