<!-- psalm 123 | vol 3 | scan pages 218-219 -->

<!-- PAGE 218 -->
8. For the sake of my brethren and my friends^ let me speak. Peace (be) within thee. By brethren and friends we are to understand the whole body of the chosen people. For their sake may include the sense of in their behalf. The last clause admits of a different construction, Let me speak peace to thee, literally in thee. See above, on Ps. Ixxxv. 9 (8.) The optative meaning of the verb ia determined by the particle (ii5 j the use of which here seems to be imitated in Ps. cxv. 2. cxvi. 4.

9. For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God^ I will seek thp good. The house of Grod is here the sanctuary and all the interests of which it was the local centre. Jehovah our God, our patron and protector, our peculiar covenant God. Seek includes every form of effort to promote it; but the prominent idea is that of intercession. PSALM   CXXIII.

1. A Song of the Ascents. Unto thee do I raise my eyes, the (one) sitting in the heavens. This psalm contains an expression of solicitous desire for divine help, v. 1,2, a direct prayer for mercy, V. 3, and a statement of the circumstances which occasioned it. With the first clause compare Ps. cxxi. 1, with the second, Ps. ii. 4. xi. 4. ciii. 19. cxiii. 3, 5.

2. Behold J as the eyes of servants (are turned) to the hand of their masters, as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes (are turned) to Jehovah our God, until he have mercy upon us. The behold as, at the beginning, is equivalent to see how in English.    Some suppose the act of looking towards the hand of a superior to denote desire of protection; others an appeal to bia bounty, as in Ps. civ. 27, 28. cxlv. 15, 16 ; others an implied prayer that punishment may cease. Compare Gen. xvi. 6, 8, 9. Perhaps all these explanations err in being too specific, and the sense of the comparison is simply that they look with deference and trust to the superior power which controls them.

<!-- PAGE 219 -->
3. Have mercy upon us, oh Jehovah, have mercy upon us ; for greatly are we sated with contempt. This petition forms the centre of the psalm, to which what goes before is introductory and what follows supplementary. The contempt is that of heathen neighbours, and especially that of the Samaritans, which is expressly mentioned in the hi.story.    See Neh. i. 3. ii. 19,

4. Much sated in itself is our soul with the scorning of the secure^ the contempt of the proud. In itself, literally, to or for itself, as in Ps. cxxii. 3. Secure (sinners), those at ease, indifferent to the sufferings of others, and without apprehension of their own. Compare Ps. Ixxiii. J 2.
