<!-- psalm 124 | vol 3 | scan pages 219-221 -->

<!-- PAGE 219 -->
1. A Song of the Ascents. By David. If (it had) not (been) Jehovah who was for ws—oh let Israel say. This psalm consists of two parts, an acknowledgment of God as the deliverer of Israel, vs. 1—5, and a consequent determination to trust in him exclusively for future favours, v. 6—9. The verse before us propounds the theme of the whole composition, in a conditional and imperfect, but for that very reason a more striking form It is tantamount to saying, what if the Lord had not been for us ?—leaving the answer to the imagination of the reader. For W5, in our favour, on our side ; or to us^ belonging to us, ours, which really includes the other. See above, on Ps. Ivi. 10 (9.) Oh that in the last clause represents (j^d) the particle of entreaty The common version {now) conveys the very different idea, at lengthy after all that we have suffered, let Israel so say. The mistake is rendered more natural or rather unavoidable, to mere English readers, by the seeming antithesis between the now of this verse and the then of vs. 3, 4, 5, of which there is not the slightest trace in the original.

<!-- PAGE 220 -->
2. If (it had) not {been) Jehovah who was for us, in the rising up of man against us—^What was left unfinished in the first verse, as a mere suggestion of the Psalmist's theme, is now repeated, for the purpose of being carried out. This is one of the rhetorical resumptions, which some modern critics hold to be the (nib?.^_) degrees, from which these fifteen psalms derived their common designation.    With this verse compare Ps. Ivi. 12 (11.)

3. Then alive would they have swallowed us, in the kindling oj their 'wrath against us. With respect to the then at the beginning of this verse, there is danger of an error just the opposite of that already pointed out in reference to the now of v. 1. As the English reader would be almost sure to take that for a particle of time, which it is not, he would be equally certain to mistake this for a term of logic, meaning in that case, upon that supposition, or the like ; whereas it really means at that time, the well remembered time of our extremity, when God so wonderfully interposed for our deliverance. The Hebrew particle occurs in this form only here, and is consequently no more a proof of recent than of early date. Another word liable to misconstruction in the English versions of this clause is quick, here used in its primary sense of livhig or alive^ from which may be easily deduced its secondary sense of swift^ implying lively motion. The historical allusion, in this and other like passages, is no doubt to the fate of Korah and his company. Compare Num. xvi. 32, 33, where the same verb and adjective occur together. See above, on Ps. Iv. 16 (15.J The plural pronoun their refers to the collective man in the preceding verse.

<!-- PAGE 221 -->
4. Then the waters uwuld have overwhelmed us (and) a stream passed over our soul. The common version {had overwhelmed us) is entirely correct, and more poetical in form than that here given, but at the same time ambiguous, as the sentence, taken by itself, would seem to mean, that before the time signified by then, the waters had actually overwhelmed them, which was not the case. The figures are the same as in Ps. xviii. 5, 17 (4, 16.) cxliv. 7.

5. Then had passed over our soul the waters, the proud (waters.) The waters are so described, partly because of the ideas suggested by their swelling (Ps. Ixxxix. 10), partly because they represent dangers arising from the selfish pride of human enemies. Some, without necessity, recur to the primary meaning of the root, and explain the adjective to mean boiling, effervescing.

6. Blessed {he) Jehovah., who did not give us (as) prey to their teeth. By one of those rhetorical transitions which are constantly occurring in the figurative diction of the psalms, the enemies and dangers, which had just been represented as an overwhelming flood or torrent, are suddenly transformed into devouring beasts. See above, on Ps. iii. 8 (7.) Iviii. 7 (6.) With the benediction or doxology, blessed (be) Jehovah, compare Ps. xxviii. 6. xxxi. 22 (21.)

7. Our soul is escaped, like a bird, from the snare of the fowlers, ihe snare is broken and we are escaped. We have here a second transition and a third comparison, to wit, that of the enemies to fowlers, and of their devices to snares or traps used in catching
