<!-- psalm 125 | vol 3 | scan pages 222-225 -->

<!-- PAGE 222 -->
birds. In the second clause there is an obvious climax. Not only is the bird gone, but the snare is broken. This is peculiarly appropriate to the restoration of the Jews from Babylon, which was occasioned by the fall of Babylon itself. With the figures of this verse compare Ps. xviii. 5 (4.) xci. 3. The English phrase is escapedy denoting a change of state, and not, like has escaped^ a single act, is well suited to represent the Hebrew verb, which, though active in meaning, has the passive form.

8. Our help is in the name of Jehovah^ maker of heaven and earth. The conclusion drawn from the experience here recorded is, that he who had helped them must help them still. Our help for the future no less than the past. In the name of Jehovah^ the manifested attributes, which constitute his name^ in the peculiar dialect of Scripture, and especially of this book. See above, on Ps. V. 12 (11) XX. 2(1.) With this verse compare also Ps xxxiii. 22. cxxi. 2. PSALM   CXXY.

1. A Song of the Ascents. Those trusting in Jehovah (are) like Mount Zion, (which) is not moved (but) stands forever. This psalm contains an expression of strong confidence in the divine protection, vs. 1, 2, especially against wicked enemies, v. 3, with a prayer that this confidence may not go unrewarded, v. 4, and a prophetic anticipation of the fate of the ungodly, v. 5. The condition of the chosen people, here described or pre-supposed, as Buffering fr)m the spite of heathen enemies, not in captivity or exile, but at home in their own land, and internally divided into two great parties, the sincere and hypocritical, agrees exactly with the period of the Restoration, and especially that part of it in which the building of the temple was suspended, as known to us from history and prophecy. The psalm before us was well suited to alarm and warn the false Israel, as well as to encourage and support the true. According to Hengstenberg, it was intended, with the psalms before and after it, to form a trilogy, consisting of one ancient and two later compositions. Those trusting in Jehovah is a characteristic designation of the true church, the spiritual Israel, the chosen people. The meaning is not merely that they individually exercise this faith, but that collectively, or as a body, they are built upon it, and have no security except in the divine protection. Mount Zion^ not as a figure for the church, which would then be compared with itself, but simply as a mountain, and like other mountains solid and enduring, here selected as a sample or an emblem of these qualities, because it had also a religious pre-eminence, as the earthly seat and centre of the true religion. It is not (and shall not be) movp/lj shaken from its firm position. See above on Ps. xlvi. 6 (5.) Stands forever J litersiWy J sits to eterjiity^theHehYew idiom using one of these postures as we use the other, or rather using both as we use only one, to denote the op.posite- of vacillation and prostration.    See above, on Ps. cxxii. 5.

<!-- PAGE 223 -->
2. Jerusalem fhas) hills about her, and (soj Jehovah (is) ahezit his people, from noio even to eternity. The site of Jerusalem, with its peculiar features, furnishes the psalmist with a striking image of the divine protection. As in v. 1, the permanent security of the church itself is likened to the firmness of Mount Zion on its base, so here the protecting care, which causes this security, is likened to the heights by which the city is surrounded upon all sides. ' The verb has, supplied in the translation of   the   first   clause,   is   really   a   violation   of   the   Hebrew idiom, to which as well as to the kindred tongues the verb to have is utterly unknown. In our own idiom, however, it expresses the precise idea, and enables us to retain the Hebrew collocation, which assigns Jerusalem the first place in the sentence. The Hebrew corresponding to about is a compound phrase, consisting of a local adverb and a preposition, around as to. His people, meaning those who trust him (v. 1), to the exclusion of all hypocrites and unbelievers.

<!-- PAGE 224 -->
3. For not to rest is the rod of wickedness over the lot of the righteous, to the intent that the righteous may not put forth to iniquity their hands. This unusually long verse clearly shows the actual condition of the chosen people, here assumed or presupposed, as well known to the writer and original readers of the psalm. The present ascendency of wicked men is not inconsistent with the truth just stated, because it is to be brought to an end, lest the faith and patience of Grod's people should fail, and they should be tempted to renounce his service as unprofitable nay as ruinous. Compare Ps. Ixxiii. 13, 14. To rest, not merely to remain, but to continue undisturbed. The rod or staff is here a symbol of authority, and might be rendered sceptre, if the subject of discourse were kings. See above on Ps. ii. 9. xlv. 7 (6.) The lot of the righteous, their share of the inheritance of the chosen people, at first distributed by lot. To the intent indicates the reason why this undeserved superiority is not to last. The reason is founded not merely on the ill desert of the wicked, but on the interest and welfare of the righteous. Put forth^ or stretch out, literally send into. See the same construction, Gen. xxxvii. 22. Ex. xxii. 7, 10 (8, 11.) To touch iniquity is here to meddle with it, not, as some suppose, in the shape of revenge merely, but in all its degrees and forms, by which the righteous can be tempted.

4. Do good, Oh Jehovah, to the good, and to {those) upright in thnr hearts- These are additional descriptions of the true churcl or spiritual Israel, to whom alone the promise of divine favour and protection had been given. Upright^ literally straight^ straightforward, as opposed to all moral obliquity whatever. See above, on Ps. vii. 11 (10.) The prayer involves a prophetic declaration, that to such and such only, God will do good or act kindly in the highest sense.    See above, on Ps. Ixxiii. 1.

<!-- PAGE 225 -->
5. Andj (as to) those turning aside (in) their crooked (ways), Jehovah will let them go with the doers of iniquity. Peace (be) ujpon Israel! The participle in the first clause is properly a transitive and means causing to turn aside, but has here the sense of going aside, or turning in the intransitive sense, the English ^erb having precisely the same double usage. This construction of the Hebrew verb, which occurs also in Isai. xxx. 11. Job. xziii. 11, may be resolved into the usual one, by supposing an ellipsis of their feet or steps. The adjective translated crooked occurs only here and in Judg. v. 6, where the noun (ways or paths ) is expressed. It denotes the bye-ways of corrupt inclination and transgression, by which men deviate from the straight and narrow highway of God's commandments. Compare Deut. ix. 16. Mai. ii. S, 9. The workers of iniquity are not a diflferent class from these wanderers, but that to which they belong, and the doom of which they would gladly escape ; but the Lord will let them go on still with those whom they resemble in character, and as they have been like them by the way, they shall be like them in the end. Compare Ps. xxvi. 9. xxviii. 3. Having thus excluded hypocritical pretenders from the object of the benediction, he concludes by wishing or invoking ^mce upon (the true or spiritual) Israel.    Compare Isai. Ivii. 19, 21.
