<!-- psalm 128 | vol 3 | scan pages 232-233 -->

<!-- PAGE 232 -->
PSALM   GXXYIII

1. A Song of Ascents. Happy is every fearer of Jehovah^ the (ons) walking in his ways. This psalm seems intended to assure the tempted and discouraged people of Judah, under the most adverse circumstances, that devotion to his service cannot lose its reward. As if he had said, however things may now seem to an eye of sense, it is still a certain truth, that the truly happy man is he who fears Jehovah, not in mere profession, but who testifies his fear of him by walking in his ways or doing his commandments.

2. The labour of thy hands when thou shalt eat, happy thou and well with thee. The promise implied is the opposite of the threatening in Deut. xxviii. 33. Lev. xxvi. 16. What the enemies of Israel are there described as doing, it is here said that Israel shall do himself. Well with thez., literally, good for thee. The conjunction (^^3) in the first clause is not to be construed as in Ps. cxviii. 10, but as a particle of time. Happy thou., or oh thy happinesses., is an expression borrowed from Deut. xxxiii. 29.

3. Thy wife., as a fruitful vine >d the sides of thy house;thy sons, as olive-plants around thy table. The word translated sides always means the edge or border, and, according to some, the innermost part. See above, on Ps. xlviii. 3 (2.) Sons, as usual, represent the children of both sexes. The olive-plants are emblems of luxuriance and fruitfulness.    See above, on Ps. Hi. 10 (8), and compare Jer. xi. 16.    The Hebrew for around or alout is the same as in Ps. cxxv. 2.

<!-- PAGE 233 -->
4. See—for so shall be blessed the man fearing Jehovah. The lo or behold at the beginning is equivalent to saying, Look upon this picture, for it represents the state of one who truly fears the Lord. Although such a connection between goodness and prosperity was far more uniform and constant under the Old Testament than now, it is not to be supposed that these promises were actually verified in the experience of every godly Israelite. This has led some of the most eminent interpreters to the conclusion, that the promises of this psalm are not personal at all, but addressed to an ideal person representing the whole class of true believers, the true Israel.

5. Jehovah bless thee out of Zion, and look thou upon the icelfare of Jerusalem. The consecution of the future and imperative is the same as in Ps. ex. 2. The latter might therefore be translated as a promise, the Lord shall bless thee, but the optative meaning seems more natural in this connection. In either case, the imperative conveys substantially the same idea. See above, on Ps, xxxvii. 3, 4, 27. From Zion, as his earthly residence, the waat of the theocracy. See above, on Ps. xx. 3 (2.) Look upon, mth joy and triumph. See above, on Ps. xxii. 18 (17.; xxxvii. \c4. liv. 9 (8.) Welfare, literally goodness, not of character but of condition, good fortune. The Hebrew word occurs above, Ps ftxix. 66.

6. And see thou sons to thy sons. Peace (be) upon Israel ! The first clause is a virtual promise of long life—thou shalt see thy child" 'renh children. An interesting parallel is furnished by Zech. viii. 4, the whole of which chapter is indeed a prophetic commentary on this psalm. For the meaning of the last clause, see above, on Ps  cxxv. 5.
