<!-- psalm 129 | vol 3 | scan pages 234-237 -->

<!-- PAGE 234 -->
PSALM   CXXIX.

1. A Song of the Ascents. Many {a time) have they distressed me from my youth—oh let Israel say ! On the recollection of deliverances in times past, vs. 1—4, rests the hope of others in tim? to come, vs. 5—S. The first word after the inscription properly means much or too much. See above, on Ps. cxx. 6. cxxiii. 4. But most interpreters agree in referring it to time, as in the English version, many a time or often. The youth of Israel, as a nation, was the period of his residence in Egypt, See Hos. ii. 17. Jer. ii. 2. xxii. 21. Ezek. xxiii. 3. For the optative meaning of the last clause, and the true sense of the Hebrew particle (^|), see above, on Ps. cxviii. 2. cxxiv. 1. Distressed^ persecuted or oppressed me. Compare the use of the participle in Ps. vi. 8 (7.) vii. 5 (4.) xxiii. 5.

2. Many {a time) have they distressed me from my youth ; yet have they not prevailed against me. The statement in the first verse is repeated, for the sake of being joined with one of a more cheering character. Ye^, literally, also. As if he had said: it is true that they have so done, but it is also true, etc. Prevailed against me., literally, leen able {as) to me, i. e. able to accomplish their designs respecting me. See Gen. xxxii. 26 (25), and compare Ps. xiii. 5 (4.)

3. Upon my back ploughed ploughers ; they made long their fur^ rows.    The expression on my back seems to show that the allusion 10* 226 PSA.LM   CXXIX. is to wounds produced by stripes. As if he had said, my baclj was furrowed by their whips or scourges. We have here then an example of the image of an image. The ploughing is a figure for scourging, and the scourging a figure for the manifold sufferings inflicted upon Israel by his cruel enemies.

<!-- PAGE 235 -->
4. Jehovah (is) righteous ; he cut the cord of the wicked. He is righteous, and therefore faithful to his promise, and to his covenant engagements to his people. The cord (not cords) is that which fastened the ox to the plough. This continuation of the figure in v. 3 is much more natural than the assumption of a new one, that of confinement by the tying of the limbs, as in Ps. ii. 3. According to the first translation above given, the meaning of the clause is, that Jehovah put an end to their inflictions by a violent separation from their victim.

5. Shavied and turned lack are fand shall be) all haters of Zion. What Jehovah has already done for Zion, as recorded in V. 4, creates and justifies the confident belief, that he will do still more. This language was peculiarly appropriate to Israel at the Restoration, when the main deliverance had already been accomplished, but others were still needed to complete the happy revolution. With the first clause compare Ps. vi. 11 (10.) XXXV. 4 (3.) xl. 14 (13 )

G. They shall he like the grass of the house-tops^ whichy lefore one pulls {it)J withers. The flat roofs of the oriental houses being often covered with earth, grass and weeds readily spring up, but having no depth of root soon wither. Compare my note on Isai. xxxvii. 27, from which place the figure is here borrowed. The common version (afore it groweth up) is founded on Jerome's {statim ut viruerit.) The other is supported by the Septuagint and Vulgate (ngo rod stoTtuadrivui,^ priusquam evellatur) and by the usage of the verb  (^\'^) in the sense of drawing (a sword), drawing off (a shoe) etc

<!-- PAGE 236 -->
7. (With) ichich the reaper Jills not his hand and his hosom^ (when) binding sheaves. The ephemeral and worthless vegetation of the house-top is contrasted still further with the useful products of the earth, in order to contrast still more strongly the end of the righteous and the wicked. The last Hebrew word is translated above strictly as a paiticiple of the verb (*i;o3>) to bind or gather sheaves, and may agree with (liZIp) reaper in the first clause. Since the latter, however, is itself a participle used as a noun, most interpreters put the same construction on the other word, and suppose it to denote a different person from the reaper. With which the reaper Jills not his hand nor his bosom the sheafbiTuler. The word translated bosom is explained by lexicographers to mean the front fold of the oriental robe, in which things are carried. It might also be translated lap. Hengstenberg's version is his arm.    Compare my note on Isai. xlix. 22.

8 Nor do the passers by say., The blessing of Jehovah fcome) unto yoUy we bless you in the name of Jehovah. The negative description is still carried out, with unusual distinctness and particularity. This verse affords an interesting glimpse of ancient harvest usages, confirmed by the historical statement in Ruth ii. 4, from the analogy of which place it is altogether probable, although denied by some, that there is here allusion to the alternate or responsive salutations in common use among the people. "We may then supply in thought before the last clause, nor receive the customary answer. As the Hebrew preposition before you does not mean on but to or unto., it seems better to supply co)m than be.    With this verse compare Ps. cxviii. 26. 228 rSALM   CXXX rSALM   CXXX.

<!-- PAGE 237 -->
1. A So7ig of Ascents. Out of tie depths do I invoke thee, ok Jehovah ! This is the penitential psalm of the series, in which the guilt of the chosen people is distinctly acknowledged, as the cause of its calamities, but not as an occasion of despair. After an introductory petition to be heard, vs. 1, 2, comes the indirect confession of sin, vs. 3, 4, then an expression of strong confidence, vs. 5, 6, and an exhortation to Israel to indulge the same, vs. 7, 8. The distinction made in this last stanza, between Israel at large and the penitent who ytters the previous confession, would seem to show, that the latter is to be conceived of as an individual, and not as representing the whole people. But the best interpreters are of opinion, that the distinction is entirely formal, and that the object of address in the last stanza is identical with the person speaking in the others. See above, on Ps. Ixix. 3, 15 (2, 14), and compare Isai. li. 10, in all which places the word translated depths occurs, and in the same sense, as a figure for extreme dejection and distress. The figure itself is also used in Ps. xl. 3 (2.) Ezek. xxvii. 34.

2. Lord, hearken to my voice ; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications. The first word in Hebrew is (*^n») the one strictly meaning Lord, and showing that the prayer is offered to a sovereign God. The common verb (2>?3'>^') to hear is here construed with a preposition (a), thus resembling, in its syntax, our verbs hearken, listen.    The adjectiv-'^ atte^^iive is peeuliai
