<!-- psalm 130 | vol 3 | scan pages 238-239 -->

<!-- PAGE 238 -->
to the later Hebrew, though its verbal root is of frequent occurrence in the psahns. Supplications^ prayers for grace or mercy See above, on Ps. xxviii. 6. xxxi. 23 (22.)

3. If iniquities thou mark^ oh Jah—oh Lord^ who shall stand ? This interrogation clearly implies consciousness of guilt, and 13 therefore an indirect confession of it. To inark is to note, take notice of, observe. The Hebrew verb is used in precisely the same manner, Job x. 14. xiv. 16. To stand is to stand one's ground, maintain one's innocence, and perhaps in this case, to endure one's sentence. See above, on Ps. i. 6, and compare Nah. i. 6. Mai. iii. 2. The question is equivalent to a strong negation, or an affirmation that none can stand.

4. For with thee (there is) forgiveness^ to the intent that thou mayest be feared. The for has reference to a thought suppressed but easily supplied. Since none can stand, oh Lord, forgive,/br with thee, etc. Or, since none can stand, our only hope is in free forgiveness, for with thee etc. With thee^ belonging to thee, exercised by thee. The word rendered forgiveness is peculiar to the later Hebrew; its plural form occurs in Neh. ix. 17. The forgiveness that we need, the (only) forgiveness that is available or attainable. To the. intentj for this very purpose, not merely so that, as an incidental consequence. Fear or godly reverence is here represented as one fruit and evidence of pardoned sin.

5. I wait for Jehovah—my soul waits—and in his word do 1 hope. The last verb also means to wait for his word, i. e the fulfilment of his promise, as in Ps. cxix. 74, 81, 82, 114, 147. My soul waits, I wait with all my soul or heart. My powers and affections are absorbed in this earnest expectation <5   My soul {-wsdta) for the Lord more than (thoso) watching S to PSALM   CXXX. fur the morning—watching for the morning. There is something beautiful and toucliing in this simple repetition, though it is not easy to account for its effect, which is sensibly impaired by the attempt made in the English version to relieve the baldness of the iteration, I say more than they that xoatch for the morning. The comparison suggested is between the impatience of nocturnal watchers for the break of day and that of sufferers for relief, or of convicted sinners for forgiveness.

<!-- PAGE 239 -->
7. Ho'pe ihoUy Israel^ in Jehovah ; for with Jehovah (is) mercy^ and abundantly with him redemption. The third person used in the English Bible {let Israel hope in the Lord) is an inaccuracy the more remarkable because not found in the Prayer Book Version {Oh Israel^ trust in the Lord.) In Jehovah, literally to him, i. e. look to him with confident expectation, as in Isai. li. 5. The construction in the last clause is idiomatic and not susceptible of close translation. The word corresponding to abundantly is the infinitive of a verb meaning to increase or multiply, but is often used adverbially in the sense of much, greatly, or abundantly. See above, on Ps. li. 4(2.) Redemption, dGliversiTLGe^ especially from bondage, that of Babylon in Ps. cxi. 9, that of sin or condemnation in the case before us.

8. And He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. The pronoun is emphatic ; only trust him for redemption, and he will himself redeem thee. As the first clause shows by whom Israel is to be redeemed, to wit, by God alone, so the second shows from what, to wit, from sin, as the cause of his sufferings. This is a very significant variation of the older passage, Ps. xxv. 22, where the sufferings alone are expressly nientioned.
