<!-- psalm 131 | vol 3 | scan pages 240-241 -->

<!-- PAGE 240 -->
PSALM   CXXXI.

1. A Song of Ascents. By David. Ok Jehovah., not haughty is my hearty and not lofty are my eyes^ and I meddle not ivitk great {things) and (with things) too wonderful for me. This short psalm is perfectly in David's manner, as well as his spirit, dis playing in a high degree that childlike royalty, in which he is resembled by no other even of the sacred writers. Haughty^ literally high^ bnt with particular reference to hauteur or loftiness of spirit. Lofty eyes are mentioned elsewhere by David himself as a sign of pride. See Ps. xviii. 28 (27.) ci. 5. The elation here described is elsewhere represented as the natural fruit of undisturbed prosperity. See Deut. xxxii. 15. 2 Chron. xxvi. 16. xxxii. 25. This confirms the Davidic origin of the psalm, and shows that it was only adapted by the later writer to his own purpose, when the original conception would have been almost impossible. Meddle^ literally, walk or loalk about^ i. e. employ or (as the English versions have it) exercise myself. Too loonderful for we, wonderfully done (more) than I (can comprehend.) The great and wonderful things meant are God's secret purposes and sovereign means for their accomplishment, in which man is not called to co-operate but to acquiesce. As David practised this forbearance by his patient expectation of the kingdom, both before and after the death of Saul, so he here describes it as a characteristic of the chosen people.

2. (God knows) if I have not soothed and quieted my soul., as a weaned (child leans) itpon his rtiother; as a weaned (child leans) on me my soul. The first clause contains a strong asseveration, in the idiomatic form of an ancient oath, very feebly represented by our adverb surely. See above, on Ps. Ixxxix. 36 (35.) The word translated soothed means rather smoothed^ levelled, as in Isai. xxviii. 25. Quieted^ stilled, hushed, reduced to silence. The repeated use of the preposition on in this connection is so marked and striking, that it seems to make it necessary to supply a verb with which it may be construed. This is certainly better than to give it a different meaning in the two clauses, or in both one which doe« not belong to it. In the version above given, the comparison suggested is between a weaned child, quietly reposing on its mother's breast, without desiring to be suckled as of old, and the soul of the Psalmist, by a bold conception represented as his child, and acting in like manner. Hengstenberg denies that there is any reference to the mother's milk, or that weaned has any other meaning here than that of infant or young child, as in Isai. xi. 8. xxviii. 9. The comparison is then coincident with that in Matth. xviii. 3, 4. But the use of the word weaned^ which was here required by no parallelism as in Isaiah, and the singular aptness of the figure suggested by the word when strictly understood, have led most interpreters, and will probably lead most readers, to prefer the obvious and strict in^terpretation.

<!-- PAGE 241 -->
3. Hojpe thou^ Israel^ in Jehovah^ from now even to eternity. This is the opposite of the feeling disavowed in the pt-eceding verses. From the first clause that of Ps. cxxx. 7 was no doubt borrowed by the later writer, who prefixed that psalm to the one before us.    With the last clause compare Ps. cxxi. 8.
