<!-- psalm 132 | vol 3 | scan pages 242-248 -->

<!-- PAGE 242 -->
PSAL M   CXXXII.

1- A Song of Ascents Remember, oh Jehovah, for David, aU his affliction. This psalm contains a commemoration of David's zeal for the house of God, vs. 1—9, and a prayer that it may"be rewarded by the fulfilment of the promise to him and to his house, vs. 10—18. The common version {remember David and all his afflictions) omits a preposition and inserts a conjunction, both without necessity. The same verb and preposition (b 15T) are combined elsewhere, in the sense of remembering something in a person's favour, to his advantage, for his benefit. See above, on Ps. xcviii, 3. cvi. 45. cxix. 49. So here: remember, in behalf of David, how he was distressed. The common version of this last phrase {all his afflictions) supposes the Hebrew word (nis^) to be a plural noun, whereas it is the infinitive of the passive verb /rT35>) to be afflicted or distressed (Ps. cxix. 71), and is therefore more correctly rendered in the Prayer Book {all his trouble.) The precise sense is, his being afflicted. The distress referred to is the great anxiety which David felt, first to reunite the ark and tabernacle, and then to build a more permanent sanctuary. This zeal for the house of God is one of the most characteristic features in the history of David, and for this he was rewarded, not only with a promise that his son should execute his favourite design, but also with a promise that God would build a house for him, by granting a perpetual succession in his family upon the throne of Judah. This promise seemed to be forgotten at the time of the Captivity, and even after the first Restoration, when the house of David was reduced so low, that its hereditary representative, tM PSALM   CXXXII. Zerubbabel, never even bore the royal title. The form of the petition in this verse is copied from that of Solomon, at the dedication of the temple, as recorded in 2 Chron. vi. 42.

<!-- PAGE 243 -->
2. Who swore to Jehovah, vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob, This last expression is borrowed, both here and in Isai. i. 24, from Jacob himself.    See Gen. xlix. 24.

3. If I go into the tent (which is) my house, if I go up on the bed (which is) my couch. The elliptical form of swearing here used is equivalent to saying, I will not go. See above, on Ps. cxxxi. 2. The tent my house, the couch my led, are mere poetical expressions for the house where I dwell, the couch where I lie. Instead of being in apposition, however, they may be in regimen, the tent of my house, tlie couch of my led, i. e. the dwelling place of my house, the resting place of my bed.

4. If I give sleep to my eyes, to my eyelids slumber. This is a part of the sentence begun in v. 3 and completed in v. 5. The promise is, of course, not to be absolutely understood, but as meaning, that he would not sleep at ease, or abandon himself to undisturbed repose, till the condition was complied with.

5. Until I find a place for Jehovah, dwellings for the Mighty One of Jacob. The implication in the first clause, that Jehovah was without a place on earth, may remind us of Christ's memorable saying. Matt. viii. 20. Luke ix. 58. The word translated dweU Hngs is peculiarly expressive, because, although strictly a generic term, it is specially applied in usage to the sanctuary with its enclosures and apptmdages.    See above, on Ps. Ixxxiv. 2 (1.)

6. Lo, ive heard it in Ephrathah ; we found it in the fields of the wood. These are most probably the words of David and his coui:€mporaries, with respect to the recovery of the ark.     We heard it^ or heard of it, i. e. of the ark, in plying that they did not see it, that it was out of public view. In Ephrathah has been variously explained. Some suppose it to mean Ephraim, as Ejphrathi means an Ephraimite, and apply the words to Shiloh, where the ark was long deposited. But Ephrathah itself is never 60 used elsewhere, and the ark, while at Shiloh, was as much in public view as at Jerusalem. Others, because Bethlehtin Ephrathah and Bethlehem Judah are convertible expressions (1 Sam. Xvii. 12. Mic. V. 1), make Ephrathah another name for Judah, which it never is, however, when it stands by itself. The only explanation, equally agreeable to usage and the context, is that which makes Ephrathah the ancient name of Bethlehem (Gen xlviii. 7j, here mentioned as the place where David spent his youth, and where he used to hear of the ark, although he never saw it till long afterwards, when he found it in the fields of the wood, or in the neighbourhood of Kirjath-jearim, which name means Forest-town or City of the "Woods. Compare 1 Sam. vii. 1 with 2 Sam. vi. 3, 4.

<!-- PAGE 244 -->
7. Let us covic to his dwellings ; let us how down to his footstool. Another step is here taken in reviewing the history of the sanctuary and of David's zeal for it. These are such words as might have been spoken at the public and solemn introduction of the ark into Jerusalem. As if it had been said : the ark of God has long been lost or out of sight, but now that a dwelling is provided for it on Mount Zion, let us come etc. Without any material change of sense, the future form may be retained, and the paragogic augment understood to express a strong determination. Now that the ark is established on Mount Zion, we will come etc. With respect to the representation of the ark as the footstool of Jehovah, and the act of bowing down to it, see above, on Ps xcix. 5.

8. Arise^ Jehovah^ to thy resting-place ^ thou and the ark of thy strength. Here again the form of expression is borrowed from tlie words of Solomon at the dedication of the temple, as recorded in 2 Chr vi. 41. This shows that the Psalmist regarded Solomoir as merely carrying out his father's plan, or acting as th«e executor of his will, which is in fact the mutual relation of these personages as they appear in sacred history. A more remote allusion may be traced to Num. x. 35. See above, on Ps. Ixviii. 2(1.) The word translated resting-place has here its proper meaning as a local noun. The last clause shows the true import of the ark in the Mosaic system, as a pledge and token of Jehovah's presence, so that its solemn entrance into Zion was the entrance of the Lord himself, and to bow down to it was to worship him. T/ig a?-k of thy strength is by some, in accordance with a common Hebrew idiom, resolved into thy ark of strength^ and that into thy strong (or mighty) ark. It is simpler, however, and in this case yields a better meaning, to retain the original expression in its obvious sense, the ark which assures us of the presence and exertion of thy power for our protection.

<!-- PAGE 245 -->
9. Let thy priests be clothed ivith righteousness^ and let thy saints shout (or sing.) This is the conclusion of the sentence quoted from 2 Chr. vi. 41. Instead of righteousness we there read salvation^ which has led some to explain the two words as synonymous, while others understand by righteousness the practical justification which salvation carries with it. Another possible construction is to take the righteousness as that of God, which is displayed in the salvation of his people, and in which his priests, who officially declared it, might be said to clothe themselves. See the samo figure in Job xxix. 14. Saints^ gracious ones, or true believers. The parallel passage has, rejoice in good or good7iess.

10. For the sake of David thy servant^ turn not away the face of thine Anointed. The most obvious construction of this verse is that which makes it intercede, on the ground of the divine par- PSALM   ex XX [I. 237 tiality to David^ /or another person, supposed by some to be one or more of his successors in the kingly office, by others Israel at large. A comparison, however, of the place from which the words are borrowed (2 Chron. vi. 42) and of v. 17 below, makes it highly probable that both clauses relate to David himself. This may be rendered clearer and more natural by makino- the first clause an elliptical petition, entirely distinct from the second. For the sake of David thy servant (grant these requests which are really his); turn not away (his face which is) the face of thine Anointed. The frequency with which God is urged to hear and answer prayer/or David''s sake (1 Kings xi. 12, 13. xv. 4. 2 Kings viii. 19, etc.) is not to be explained by making David mean the promise to David, nor from the personal favour of which he was the object, but from his historical position, as the great theocratical model, in whom it pleased God that the old economy should reach its culminating point, and who is always held up as the type and representative of the Messiah, so that all the intervening kings are mere connecting links, and their reigns mere repetitions and continuations of the reign of David, with more or less resemblance as they happened to be good or bad. Hence the frequency with which his name appears in the later Scriptures, compared with even the best of his successors, and the otherwise inexplicable transfer of that name to the Messiah himself. It is in this unique character and office, as the Servant of the Lord, that David is here mentioned, first by his own name, and then as the Anointed King of Israel, whose face Jehovah is entreated not to turn away, a figure for refusing him an audience, or at least denying his petition, which we know to have been used in David's times.    See the Hebrew of 1 Kings ii. 16, 17, 20.

<!-- PAGE 246 -->
11. Sworn hath Jehovah to David [\n) truth^ he will not turii hack from it: Of the fruit of thy body [ will place on the throne for thee. See above, on Ps. Ixxxix. 4, 36 (3, 35), and compare 2 Sam. vii. 28.     Turn back, recede from his engagement, cr fail 238 P5AL-M   CXXXII. 10 perform it. Of the fruity from among thy posterity or offspring. On the throne^ literally to ov for it. See above, on Ps. ix. 5 (4.) For thety in thy place, as thy representatives, or {helotiging) to theCy i. e. thy throne.

<!-- PAGE 247 -->
12 If thy sons loill observe my covenamt and my testimonies which I teach them^ (then) likewise their sons unto perpetuity shall sit upon the throne for thee. This is the condition of the promise, the breach of which accounts for the apparent violation of the promise itself. Such a suspension of the promise was not only just in itself, but foreseen and provided for (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15), as something perfectly consistent with the perpetuity of the engagement, / teach you refers not only to external legislation, but to spiritual guidance and illumination.

13. For Jehovah has chosen Zion^has desired (it) for a dwelling for him. Besides the oath and promise made directly to David, the petition of the psalm is here enforced by the divine choice of Zion, which was inseparably connected with the exaltation of the family of David. See the same thing asserted or implied, Ps. xliii. 2(1.) Ixv. 2 (\.) cxxv. 2. As in vs. 11, 12, the last words in Hebrew (ib) may be also rendered to him^ belonging to him, his dwelling.

14. This is my resting-place to perpetuity ; here will I dwell, because I have desired it. These are the words of God, though not expressly so described. See above, on Ps. Ixxxvii. 4. Ixxxix. 4, 5 (3, 4.) The word translated dwell means originally to sit, and especially to sit enthroned, so that this idea would be neces-i sarily suggested with the other to a Hebrew reader, See above, on Ps. xxix. 10. Iv. 20 (19.) cii 13 (12.) cxxiii. 1.

15. Her provision I will bless, I ivill bless; her poor I will tatisfy (with) bread.    The repetition of the verb may expre?/? either certainty or fulness. / will surely blesSj or I will bless abundantly. See above, on Ps. cxxvi. 6. The word translated 'provision is a cognate form to that i,n Ps. Ixxviii. 25. Satisfy^ amply or abundantly supply.

<!-- PAGE 248 -->
16. And her jpriests I ivill clothe with salvation ; and her sainti shall shout^ shall shout (for joy.) This is the promise corresponding to the prayer in v. 9. The word salvation^ for which righteousness was substituted there, is here restored from the original passage, 2 Chron. vi. 41. The last verb in Hebrew means to express joy by shouting or singing. As to the emphatic repetition, see above, on v. 15.

17. There will I make to bud a horn for David ; I have trimmed a lamp for mine Anointed. These are common figures in the Scripture for strength and prosperity. See above, on Ps. xviii (10),29 (28.) Ixxxix. 18 (17.) xcii. 11, and compare 1 Sam. ii. 1. 2 Sam. xxi. 17. Ezek. xxix. 21. The last clause contains an allusion to the Law, which cannot be preserved in any version. The word translated lamp is used to designate the several burners of the golden candlestick (Ex. xxv. 37. xxxv. 14. xxxvii. 23. xxxix. 37), and the verb here joined with it is the one applied to the ordering or tending of the sacred lights by the priests (Ex. xxvii. 21. Lev. xxiv. 3.) The meaning of the whole verse is, that the promises of old made to David and to Zion should be yet fulfilled, however   dark   and  inauspicious present  appearances.

18. His enemies I ivill clotJie with shame^ and on him shall bloom his crown. The pronouns refer to David, as the Lord's Anointed, mentioned in v. 17. The figure in the first clause is the converse or counterpart of that in vs. 9, 16, and the same with that in Ps. xxxv. 2Q. cix. 29. With the last clause compare Ps. Ixxxix. 40 (39.) The verb to bloom or blossom agrees well with the idea of  a wreath or  chaplet. Compare the (jc/nao&VTcvov crrkcfavov of 1 Pet. V 4. Some prefer, however, to retain what they regard as the original meaning of the Hebrew verb; on him shall his crown ihiiu (or glitter.)    See above, on Ps. Ixxii. 16.
