<!-- psalm 134 | vol 3 | scan pages 251-252 -->

<!-- PAGE 251 -->
1. A Song of Ascents. Behold! bless Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah J those standing in the house of Jehovah by night. The whole series of pilgrimage songs closes, in the most appropriate manner, with a summons to bless the Lord, addressed by the people on arriving at the sanctuary to the priests there in attendance, vs. 1, 2, and indirectly answered by a priestly blessing on the worshippers themselves, v. 3. The h or behold at the beginning is equivalent to saying, See, we are here, or we are come. To bless God, as in all other cases, is to praise him in a reverential and adoring manner. The servants of the Lord here meant are not his people indiscriminately, but his official servants, and most probably the priests, as will appear from v. 3 below. TA? (owes) standing, the appropriate posture of attendants, even in the courts of earthly monarchs. By night, literally, in the nights, which does not however necessarily mean all night (1 Chron. ix. 33), as appears from Ps. xcii. 3, where it stands opposed to in thi morning, and may therefore denote simply in the evening, rltt PSALM   ex XX IV. 243 gpecijfic reference, as some suppose, to the evening sacrifice^ with which the daily service of the priests concluded. "We may then assume, although we cannot prove, that the pilgrims were accustomed to reach the sanctuary at that hour, singing this last " song of ascents."

<!-- PAGE 252 -->
2. Raise your hands to the holy ^lace, and bless Jehovah ! Tho gesture mentioned in the first clause symbolized the raising of the heart to God. See above, on Ps. xxviii. 2. Ixiii. 5 (4.) The word for holy jplace or sanctuary is the same in form with that so frequently translated as an abstract, holiness. For its local meaning, see above, on Ps. xx. 3 (2.) It here denotes the temple or its site, as distinguished from the courts around it. Ah to the act of praying to or towards it, see above, on Ps. v. 8 (7.) xcix. 5.

3. Jehovah bless thee out of Zion^ Maker of heaven and earth. As the priests were called upon to bless God in behalf of the people, so here they bless the people in behalf of God. Between the verses wc may suppose the previous request to be complied with. The priests, having blessed God, turn and bless the people. The obvious allusion to the sacerdotal blessing. Num. vi. 23—27, favours the optative construction of this verse, which really includes a prediction {the Lord ivill bless thee.) Out of Zion, ag in Ps. cxxviii. 5. Maker of heaven and earthy and therefore infinitely able to fulfil this prayer. See above, on Ps. cxv. 15 cxxi. 2. cxxir. S.
