<!-- psalm 138 | vol 3 | scan pages 267-269 -->

<!-- PAGE 267 -->
This is the first of a series of eight psalms (cxxxviii—cxlv), probably the last composed by David, a kind of commentary on the great Messianic promise in 2 Sam. vii. They are found in this part of the Psalter, in consequence of having been made the basis, or rather the body, of a system or series (cxxxv—cxlvi) by a later writer. See above, on Ps. cxxxv. 1. The psalm before us contains an acknowledgment of God's goodness as experienced already, vs. 1—3, an anticipation of his universal recognition by the nations, vs. 4, 5, and in the mean time of additional favours to the Psalmist, or to the church of which he was the temporary head, vs. 6—S. Such a psalm was of course well suited to sustain the faith and revive the hopes of a later generation.

1. By David. I will thank thee with all my heart; before gods I ivill praise thee. The Davidic style and tone of composition are acknowledged even by the skeptical interpreters. With all my heart implies the greatness of the gift to be acknowledged, which was no doubt the promise of Messiah contained in 2 Sara, vii. See above, on Ps. ix. 2 (1.) Before gods, i. e. in the presence, to the face, and in contempt of all imaginary rival deities. The translation before God is grammatical, but confounds the Becond and third person in a single clause. The Septuagint and Vulgate have before angels^ which is inconsistent with the usage of the Hebrew word.     Thank thee, in the strict sense of praising for benefits received; or in a wider sense, acknowledge thee as God. Praise thee^ make music, sing and play to thee. With this verse compare Ps. vii. 18 (17.) xviii. 50 (49.) liv. 8 (7.) Ivii. 10 (9.) ci. 1.

<!-- PAGE 268 -->
2. / will how down to thy holy tcmjple^ and will tJmnk thy name, for thy mercy and for thy truth ; for thou hast m.ade great, above all thy name, thy promise. With the first clause compare Ps. v. 8 (7.J Bow down, or prostrate myself, as an act of worship. Mercy in promising, truth in performing. See above, on Ps. xxv. 10. Above all thy name, i. e. all the previous manifestations of thy nature. Thy word, literally, thy saying, that which thou hast said, but applied specifically to the divine promise. See above, on Ps. xviii. 31 (30.) cxix. 38, 50, 103, 140. The transcendant promise here referred to is that of the Messiah in 2 Sam. vii. which is there described as unique by David himself, and which forms the basis of many psalms, but especially of Ps. xviii, xxi, Ixi, ci, cii, ciii, and the one before us.

3. In the day I called and thou didst answer me, thou makest me brave in my soul (with) strength. This may be connected with what goes before, thou didst magnify thy word in the day when I called etc. The promise in 2 Sam. vii was an answer to his prayer for a perpetual succession. See above, on Ps. xxi. 3, 5 (2, 4.) Ixi. 6 (5.) The common version of the last clause (strengthenedsf me with strength in my soul) contains a paronomasia not in the original, where the verb and noun have not even a letter in common. The verb is by some translated made me proicd., i. e. elated me, not with a vain or selfish pride, but with a lofty and exhilarating hope. In my soul, as opposed to a mere outward influence. Strength, i. e. strength of faith and confidence in God.

4. Jehovah, all kings of the earth shall acknowledge thee, when they have heard the sayings of thy viouth. Not merely one king, thoiigli that king be David, shall acknowledge, thank, and praise thee, but all others who receive the true religion, when they know what thou hast promised, and especially when they compare the promise and fulfilment, with particular reference to the promise of Messiah, which is described in Scripture as a grand means for the conversion of the nations and the chiefs which represent them. See above, on Ps. Ixviii. 30, 32 (29, 31.) cii. 16 (15.)

<!-- PAGE 269 -->
5. And they shall sing in the loays of Jehovah^ for great (shall be) the glory of Jehovah. The kings of the earth, representing its nations, shall join in the praise of the true God, walking in his ways, i. e. as converts to the true religion. Compare Mic. iv. 2. Isai. iv. 3. Instead of for we may read when, as in V. 4 ; when the glory of Jehovah has been duly exalted and diffused by the extension of the true religion. Some make this clause the theme or subject of the praise—they shall sing that the glory of Jehovah is great—a less natural construction, but one which yields an equally good sense.

6. For lofty is Jehovah—and the low he sees—and the haughty from afar he knoivs. The first two clauses may be in antithesis, and yet he looks n^on the loWj or simply co-ordinate, and therefare he looks ujpon the low^ i. e. the lowly, who shall be exalted, while the opposite end of the proud is implied in the concluding declaration. Even from afar, from the distant heaven where he seems to behold nothing, he knows precisely what the proud man is, what he deserves, and what is actually to befall him. See above, on Ps. i  1.

7. If I go through the midst of distress^ thou uilt save (or make) me alive ; upon the wrath of my enemies thou wilt stretch forth thy hand^ and save me (with) thy right hand. The first clause resembles that of Ps. xxiii. 4.     Go through or walk in the midst oj
