<!-- psalm 139 | vol 3 | scan pages 270-279 -->

<!-- PAGE 270 -->
trouble. To quicken or revive, as in Ps. xxx. 4 (3.) Ixxi. 20. Upon the wrath, implying motion from above, wbicli is more significant and graphic than against. The common version of the last words (and thy right hand shall save me) is equally grammatical and found in all the ancient versions ; but the other is re commended by its ascribing the deliverance directly to God, and by the analogy of Ps. Ix. 7 (5), where hand is adverbially construed with the same verb.    See also Ps. xvii. 14.

S. Jehovah will complete for me (what he has begun) Jehovah, thy mercy (is) forever; the works of thy hands do not forsake. The work begun and yet to be completed was the whole series of God's gracious dispensations towards David and his seed, beginning with the first choice of the former and ending in the Messiah. With the first clause compare Ps. Ivii. 3 (2.) Phil. i. 6. The second member of the sentence might be read, let thy mercy he forever or unto eternity. But it is more probably an affirmation, similar to that in Ps. ciii. 17, and the clause contains an appeal to the promise of eternal favour, 2 Sam. vii. 13, 26, or perhaps to the eternity of God's compassions, as a reason why he should not and could not abandon what had been so graciously begun. PSALM   CXXXIX.

The Psalmist describes God's omnipresence and omniscience, VS. 1—12, as attributes necessarily belonging to him as the Creator, vs. 13—18, and appeals to them in attestation of his own aversion to the wicked, vs. 19—24. From its collocation it is probable that this psalm  records David's exercises under the powerful impressions of the great Messianic promises in 2 Sam. vii, and is therefore to be regarded as a confession and profession made not merely for himself but for his successors on the throne of Israel, and intended both to warn them and console them by this grand view of Jehovah's constant and infallible inspection.

<!-- PAGE 271 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. By David. A Psalm. Jehovah^ thou hast searched me and knowest. As a later writer could have no motive for prefixing the title to the Chief Musician, it afford? an incidental proof of antiquity and genuineness. Thoii hasi searched me or continually sear chest me. The Hebrew verb originally means to dig and is applied to the search for precious metals (Job xxviii. 3), but metaphorically to a moral inquisition into guilt. See above, on Ps. xliv. 22 (21), and compare Job xiii. 9. It is here used in the intermediate sense of full investigation. Thou hast known or knowest all that can result from such a scrutiny, not only my corruptions and infirmities but my cares and sorrows. The object is not expressed in this verse, which is a summary of the whole psalm, because the very object of what follows is to state it in detail.

2. Thou knowest my sitting and my rising ; thou understandest as to my thought from afar. Sitting and rising or standing represent rest and motion, or all the various conditions of the living, waking man. See above, on Ps. i. I, xxvii. 2. In every posture, state, and occupation, thou knowest me. The next phrase does not merely signify, thou perceivest the meaning of my thought, but thou knowest all about it, its origin, its tendency, its moral quality; thou understandest (every thing) resj^ecting it. From afar^ unimpeded by local distance, by which men are prone to imagine the divine omniscience to be circumscribed. See Job xxii. 12—14, and compare with this verse Ps. cxxxviii. 6 Jer. xxiii. 23.

<!-- PAGE 272 -->
.3. My jpath and 7ny lair thou siftest^ and -with all my ways art acquainted. Path is here put for going, lair for lying, and these, like the terms of the preceding verse, for motion and rest, or the active and passive parts of human life. The poetical word lair is used to represent a Hebrew one, occurring only here, but the verbal root of which is used by Moses, Lev. xviii. 23. xx. 16. The last verb means to be accustomed (Num. xxii. 30), and then by a natural association, acquainted or familiar (Job xxii. 21.) My ways^ my condition and my conduct, what I do and what I suffer.

4. For there is not a word in my tongue, (but) lo, Jehovah^ thou knowest all of it. The relation of the clauses may be also expressed thus in English, which, oh Lord, thou knoicest not, all of it (or altogether.) In my tongue, in its power, or, as it were, in its possession. This verse merely applies to his words specifically what was said before of all his actions. The lo or behold is equivalent to see there, or to the act of pointing at the words aj objects of sight and as actually present.

5. Behind and before thou dost beset me, and layest ujpon me thy hand. There is here an insensible transition from God's omniscience to his omnipresence, out of which the Scriptures represent it as arising. Behind and before, i. e. on all sides. The idea of above and below is suggested by the last clause. Beset, besiege, hem in, or closely surround. Thy kandjor the palm of thy hand, as the Hebrew word strictly denotes.

6. Such knoioledge is too wonderful for me ; it is exalted, I cannot (attain) to it. The literal meaning of the Hebrew word is, wonderful knowledge away from me, or more than 1 (can comprehend) ; it is exalted, I cannot (do any thing) as to it. With the word wonderful compare the use of the cognate verb, Deut. xxx. 11. Prov. xxx. IS The knowledge meant is man's finite knowledge of the infinite.

<!-- PAGE 273 -->
7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, aTid whither from thy face shall I flee ? The interrogation involves a denial of all possible escape from God's inspection, when a guilty conscience prompts to seek one.    Compare Am. ix. 2.

8. If I scale the hxavens, there (art) thou ; and if I spread the grave, lo ihmt (art there.) The word scale is used to represent a Hebrew verb occurring only here, and no doubt belonging to the dialect of poetry. The verb translated spread means specifically to spread a couch or make a bed. If I make sheol my bed, i. e. He down in the grave or hell, in the wide old English sense. See Above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.)

9. I will raise the wivgs of day-break. I will dwell in the end of the sea. By supplying if, although the sense is not materially changed, the form of expression becomes much less striking. The conditional construction is forbidden also, or at least rendered highly improbable, by the form of the second verb, expressing strong desire and resolution. The truth is that we have here a bold transition. After speaking of guilty flight from Grod himself, the Psalmist now speaks of anxious flight from other enemies, and as if visibly surrounded by them, here resolves to escape from them. This, which is Hengstenberg's interpretation, is strongly favoured by the unconditional construction, although he himself retains the other. The same writer objects to the translation raise the wings, that before one can raise wings he must have them. But for that very reason the possession of them may be presupposed, or considered as implied in the act expressed. -The same combination is employed by Ezekiel (x. 16, 19), in a way that admits of only one translation. The Hebrew word (^D^) is not the common one for morning, but one denoting day-break or the dawn Sec above, on Ps. Ivii. 9 (8.) The point of comparison appears to be the incalculable velocity of light.    The extremity (or end) of the sea is added to heaven and hell, in order to convey the idea of the most remote points.

<!-- PAGE 274 -->
10. Even there thy hand guides me, and thy right hand holds Die. From the use of similar expressions to denote a friendly guidance and support, in Ps. xviii. 17 (16.) Iv. 7—9 (6—8.) v. 9 (8.) xxiii. 3. xxvii. 11. Lxxiii. 24, and other places, Hengstenberg infers that this must mean, when I fly to the ends of the earth before my enemies, thou art still there to protect me, and that the psalm was therefore meant not merely to alarm but to console.

11. And I say, only darkness overwhelms me, night is the light become around me. The ideal situation is the same as in v. 9, one of danger and terror, in which he is constrained to say, nothing but darkness comes upon me, smites me, and the very light 's turned to darkness round about me. According to this view if the passage, darkness, as in many other places, is a figure for calamity and danger. See Isai. 1. 10. Ps. cxxxviii. 7. According to the usual interpretation it denotes concealment from the eye of God.

12. Even darkness does 7iot make {it) dark to him, and night like day shines; as the darkness, so the light. The interpretation given of the foregoing verse does not necessarily affect the sense of this, which still means that nothing can prevent God's seeing either sin or suffering, either the danger of his people or the malice of their enemies. Make dark, as in Ps. cv. 28. To thee, literally, from thee, i. e. so as to conceal from thee.

13. For  thou possessest my reins;   thou cover est me  in my motherh womb.    The meaning of the first clause  seems to be; thou hast in thy power and at thy control the very seat of my strongest sensibilities, my pains and pleasures ; and this subjeo tion is coeval with my being, for even before birth I was under thy protection and command, as I am now. The sense of wcat ing^ which is given to the last verb by some modern writers rests on a mere etymological deduction and has no foundation either in tradition or in usage. The for at the beginning of this verse marks the transition from the fact of God's omniscience to its origin or reason in his creative character and rights. As a logical particle, the for relates, not to the immediately preceding verse, but to the whole preceding context. Grod is omnipresent and omniscient,/o? he is the maker of the universe.

<!-- PAGE 275 -->
14. / thank thee, because fearfully I am distinguished ; wonderful {are) thy works^ and (that) my soul knoweth right (well.) He makes it a subject of grateful acknowledgment, that God has distinguished him or made him to differ from inferior creatures, both in constitution and in destiny. Because is in Plebrew a compound particle {^"3 bS") like/or that.^ forasmuch as. Fearfully, literally fearful {things)^ but used adverbially, as in Ps. Ixv. 6 (b.) It might here be rendered (by) fearful (things.) The words corresponding to distinguished and wonderful are in Hebrew passive forms from cognate roots fnbb and jj^^sj. The particular statement of the first clause is resolved by the last into the general one, of which it is a mere specification. The concluding words express a strong and, as it were, experimental conviction of the truth

15. Not hid was my frame from thte^ when I was made in secretj embroidered in depths of the earth. The not hid is a meiosis, implying that God saw it clearly and fully understood it, inasmuch as he himself created it. Frame^ literally strength^ as in Deut. viii. 17, but applied to the bones and sinews as the strength T#r frame-work of the body. See above, on Ps. vi. 3 (2), and compare Job x. 11. The common Hebrew word for bont differs only in the pointing. The word translated when is (iTi^i^) the relative pronoun, and may here retain its proper meaning PSALM   CXXXIX. 26? although then not easily translated, as its antecedent is latent in the phrase my fravie^ which may be thus resolved, the frame oj me who was made, etc. In secret^ i. e. in the womb. Em.hroi' dered^ which is the invariable nieaning of the Hebrew verb, is a bold but beautiful expression for the complicated tissue of the human frame, in which so many and such various threads are curiously interwoven. Depths of the earth can only be explained as a comparative expression, corresponding to in secret and denoting the same thing, which it describes as no less dark and hidden from the view of men than subterraneous caverns, or as some suppose sheol^ the invisible world. See above, on Ps. Ixiii. 10 C9j, and compare Job i. 21, where the figure is inverted, and the grave is confounded with the womb.

<!-- PAGE 276 -->
16. My unformed substance did thine eyes sec, and in thy hook all of them are written, days are form.ed, and there is not one among them. This is one of the most obscure and doubtful verses in the book of Psalms. Its difl&culty to our own translators may be gathered from the fact, that substance yet being unperfect answers to a single Hebrew word, and that my members is a gratuitous addition to the text. The first word in Hebrew occurs only here, but is clearly derived from a verb which means to roll or roll up (2 Kings ii. 8J, and may therefore be supposed itself to signify something rolled up or rolled together, and from this may be deduced the sense of something shapeless or unformed, or more specifically that of an embryo or foetus. The next difficulty lies in the expression all of them, evaded in the English Bible by changing it to all my members and then making this the subject of the plurals following. The best interpreters are now disposed to construe all of them with days by a grammatical prolepsis. In thy book all of them are written, namely, all my days, as they were planned, projected, or decreed, before as yet one of them had really existed. Written and formed are thcii parallel expressions.    All of them are written, days are de 268 PSALM   C XX XIX. lineated or depicted. Bj days (translated iu our Bible in continue ance) we are then to understand not merely the length but the events and vicissitudes of life. See Job xiv. 5. Ps. Ivi. 9 (8.) This is one of those cases in which the dilfficulty lies in the particular expressions, while the general import of the passage is clearly determined bv the context. Instead of (s^b) not^ the keri or marginal reading m the Hebrew Bible has (ib) to him, a variation to which no one has succeeded in attaching a coherent sense. Precisely the same dijBference of text exists in Ps. c. 3.

<!-- PAGE 277 -->
17. And to me how precious are thy thoughts^ oh God ! How great is the sum of them! Having presented this impressive view of God's omniscience, he now tells how he is himself affected by it. So far from thinking it a hardship to be subject to this scrutiny, he counts it a most valuable privilege. However others may regard this truth, to me, my judgment and my feelings, how costly^ valuable, are thy thoughts^ i. e. thy perpetual attention to me. For the true sense of precious^ see above, on Ps. xxxvi. 8 (7.) xlv. 10 (9.) Great is the sum^WtQVdXXy^strong (or many) are their sums, an expression which can hardly be retained in our idiom.

18. I will count them—(but no)—more than sand they are many—/ awake and still I (am) with thee. The first clause is equivalent to a conditional proposition, if I would count them etc. but far more striking and poetical in form. Sec above, on Ps. xl. 6 (5.) I am still with thee has the same essential meaning with the similar expression in Ps. Ixxiii. 23, namely, I am still in thy society or company. But there the reference is chiefly to divine protection, here to meditation on the divine attributes. Thou art still before me as an object of adoring wonder, not by day only, but by night; not merely in the watches of the night, but even in my sleep.    See above, on Ps. i. 2. xvi. 7. Ixiii. 7 (6.) PSALM   C XXX IX, 269

<!-- PAGE 278 -->
19. If *hou wilt slay^ oh God, the wicked (man) ! And ye men of Uoodj dejpart from me ! The first clause is in fact, though not in form, the expression of a wish. If thou wouldst but slay ! In form, there is an aposiopesis, which may be variously supplied dy adding, I will praise thee, I will rejoice, it will be just, or the like. Men of bloods, murderers or murderous men. See above, on Ps. V. 7 (6.) xxvi. 9. Iv. 24 (23.; Depart from me is the same expression as in Ps. vi. 9 (8.) cxix. 15, but the main idea here is that of disavowal or repudiation. Oh that God would slay them, and until he does, I desire to have no communion with them.    Compare Job xxi. 14. Matth. vii. 23

20. Who speak of thee for wickedness and take in vain—thy foes ! Speak of thee, or name thee, use thy name, for the accomplishment of wicked ends. The other clause will then be strictly parallel, and take (thy name) in vain, as in Ex. xx. 7. For the meaning of this difficult expression, see above, on Ps. xxiv. 4. The subject of the proposition is placed emphatically at the end.

21. Thy haters, oh Jehovah, shall not I hate, and with thim assailants he disgusted ? The simple future in the first clause comprehends several distinct shades of meaning. Do I not, may I not, must I not, hate those hating thee } Hate them, not as man hates, but as God hates. See above, on Ps. v. 6 (5."\ The construction of the verb and preposition in the last clause id the same in Hebrew and in English. Be disgusted, literally, sicken or disgust myself, abhor, or loathe. Thine assailants, those rising up against thee, as rebellious enemies. The Hebre"w word is a noun formed from the participle used above, Ps. xvii. 7. lix. 2 (1.)

22. (With) perfection of hatred do I hate them, as enemies they are to me. Literally, they art for enemies, i. e. I so esteem them.    As enemies of God, they must be mine.

<!-- PAGE 279 -->
23. Search me, God^ and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts. The last expression is emphatic, meaning even my most anxious and disturbed thoughts, into which corruption might most easily find entrance. See above, on Ps. xciv. 19, the only other place where the Hebrew word occurs. In this verse, he ftgain appeals to the divine omniscience for the purity of his intentions, and thus comes back to the point from which he started.

24. And see if a way of jiain he in me, and guide me in a way of eternity. In the first clause some translate, the way of an idol., an idolatrous way. But the meaning idol is not justified by usage. A way of pain is one that leads to suff"ering and misery hereafter. The opposite of this is a icay of eternity., by which some understand an everlasting way, as distinguished from the perishable way of sinners, Ps. i. 6. Others, more probably, the way that leads to everlasting life. Usage, however, is in favour of a third and very difi"erent interpretation, which gives the Hebrew phrase (tibis? Tj'1'1) the same sense with a kindred one (t]bi^ ^^^'^^^.) used by Jeremiah (vi. 16), to wit, that o^ old or ancient way., the one pursued by prophets, patriarchs, and saints of old. Similar expressions are found in Jer. xviii. 15. Job xxii. 15, applied, in a bad sense, to the course pursued by ancient sinners. The prayer, however, still amounts to the same thing, to wit, that God would lead him in the good old way, which is itself the way to everlasting life.
