<!-- psalm 144 | vol 3 | scan pages 295-301 -->

<!-- PAGE 295 -->
This is a kind of supplement or counterpart to Ps, xviii, in which the view there taken of David's personal experience is applied to the anticipated case of his successors. The design thus assumed accounts for the position of the psalm in the collection. That its being placed precisely here is not fortuitous, may be inferred from its furnishing a kind of link between the urgent entreaties of the preceding psalms and the triumphant praise of those which follow. The Davidic origin of this psalm is as marked as that of any in the Psalter.    The accumulation  of Davidic phrases is confined to the first part, while the last is independent and original, a fact entirely inconsistent with the supposition of a later compilation. The Psalmist thanks God for his protection of himself and of mankind in general, vs. 1—4, prays for deliverance from present dangers, vs. 5—8, expresses his confident anticipation* of a favourable answer, vs. 9—10, renews his prayer, not only for himself hut for the chosen people, vs. 11—14, and felicitates them that they are such, v. 15.

<!-- PAGE 296 -->
1. By David. Blessed he Jehovah^ my Rockj the (one) training my hands for fight^ my fingers for war. See above, on Ps. xviii. 35, 47 (34, 46), where most of these expressions have already been explained. Fight and war are both verbs and nouns in English, but the Hebrew words are nouns with the article prefixed. David here begins by referring all the successes of himself and his successors to Jehovah.

2. My mercy and my fortress^ my high place^ and a deliverer for me, my shield and (he) in whom I trust, the (one) subduing my people. No less than five of these descriptive epithets are taken from a single verse of Ps. xviii, viz. v. 3 (2.) Peculiar to the place before us is my 7nercy, i. e. my God of mercy. See above, on Ps. lix. 18.(17.) The benefit of these relations to Jehovah David claims not merely for himself but for his royal race, which was closed and yet perpetuated in the Messiah. He in whom I trust, literally, and in him I trust. My people, in its widest sense, including Israel and the Gentiles who were to be added to the kingdom of David under the reign of the Messiah. Compare Ps. xviii. 44, 48 (43, 47) with the parallel passages in 2 Samuel.

3. Jehovah, what (is) man, that thou shouldsi know him, the ion of man, that thou shouldst think of him 1 The greatness of God's goodness is enhanced by a view of man's insignificance and unworttiness. The original construction seems to be, what is man? (nothing), and (yet) thoii knowest him etc. To know is here to recognise as being in existence, to take notice of. The first man is the generic term, the second one denoting weakness. See above, on Ps. viii. 5 (4), and compare 2 Sam vii. IS.

<!-- PAGE 297 -->
4. Man to vanity is like ; his days (are) as a passing shadow. He cannot therefore be a worthy object, in himself, of the divine regard and favour. With the first clause compare Ps. xxxix. 6, 7 (5, 6), Ixii. 10 (9); with the second, Ps. cii. 12 (11.) ciii. 15.

5. Jehovah^ how thy heavens and come down ; touch the mouniains and let them smoke. With the first clause compare Ps. xviii. 10 (9.) What God is there described as doing, he is here besought to do again. With the last clause compare Ps. civ. 32 Mountains, in all such connections, would necessarily suggest the idea of states and kingdoms.    See above, on Ps. xlvi. 3, 4 (2, 3.)

6. Lighten lightning and scatter them; send out thy arrows and confound them. The first word in Hebrew is a verb occurring nowhere else, and composed of the same radicals with the common word for lightning which immediately follows. For the meaning of the other terms, see above, on Ps. xviii. 15 (14), and compare the parallel passage, 2 Sam. xxii. 15 (14), with which the writer of the psalm before us was certainly acquainted, as appears from his occasional use of its peculiar readings.

7. Send thy hands from on high ; rid me and free me from (the) many waters, from the hand of aliens. With the first clause compare Ps. xviii. 17 (16.) For hand we have here the plural hands, and for the two verbs there used two substantially equivalent, the first of which has the sense here given to it only in this place and the cognate languages, and is therefore well represented by the less usual English word rid.   With the last clause, compare PSALM   CXLiy. 289 Ps. XTiii. 45, 46 (44, 45), where the phrase sons of strangmeis (or of foreign parts) has been explained already.

<!-- PAGE 298 -->
8. Whose mouth sjpeahs fraud^ and their right hand (is) a righ hand of falsehood. The word translated fraud is properly a negative meaning vanity or emptiness, but applied to the want of moral goodness and especially of truth. See above, on Ps. xxiv. 4. The right hand is mentioned in allusion either to the practice of swearing with uplifted hand (Ps. cvi. 26), or to that of striking hands in bargains (2 Kings x. 15.) There seems to be reference, in this verse, to the feigned obedience of the enemy, Ps. xviii. 45 (44.)

9. Oh God^ a new song I will sing to thee ; with a lyre of ten (strings) / will play (or make music) to thee. See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 2, 3, where David exhorts others to do what he here resolves and vows to do himself. The new song still implies a new occasion for it, so that he here begins to anticipate the answer to his foregoing prayers.

10. The (one) giving salvation to kings; the (one) ridding David his servant from an evil sword. This mode of connectinor sentences, by a participle agreeing with a noun in the foregoing context, is a characteristic feature of Ps. xviii. See vol. i. pp. 144, 145. The kings particularly meant are the theocratical sovereigns, the royal family of David. Ridding.^ the participle of the verb so rendered in v. 7. David (as) his servant^ because he is his servant, in the sense repeatedly explained already. See above, on Ps. cxliii. 2, 12. David speaks of himself by name, not only here but in Ps. xviii. 51 (50.) Ixi. 7 (6.J Ixiii. 12 (11 ") 2 Sam. vii. 26. An evil sivord, not only dangerous but wicked. Compare Ps. xxii. 21 (20.)

11. Rid me and free me from the hand of aliens, whoae nwulh VOL.   Ill 13 sjpmks fraud.^ ana whose right hand (is) a right hand of falsehood In resumiug the language of direct petition, the terms of vs. 7, 8, are studiously repeated, as if to show that this prayer is parallel to that, and not an addition to it.

<!-- PAGE 299 -->
12. So that our sons (may be) as plants grown large in their youth, our daughters as corner-stones hewn (for) the building of the temple. The reminiscences or imitations of Ps. xviii suddenly cease here, and are followed by a series of original, peculiar, and for the most part no doubt antique expressions. On the supposition that the title is correct in making David the author, this is natural enough. On any other supposition it is unaccountable, unless by the gratuitous assumption, that this is a fragment of an older composition, a mode of reasoning by which any thing may be either proved or disproved. The first word in Hebrew is the relative pronoun, and the literal meaning of the clause is, (hy) which for in consequence of which) our sons, etc. The which refers to the deliverance prayed for in the preceding verse. Groion large, literally magnified or made great. The common version (grown up in their youth) has a paradoxical appearance, arising from the ambiguity of our phrase grown up, which is applied (like the G-reek ^\Uiiia) both to age and stature. The word translated corner-stones has the same sense in Zech. ix. 15. The cornertstones are mentioned as those which were hewn and polished with peculiar care. Likeness or model would agree better with the usage of the- Hebrew word (^'^r^?^), but its primary sense, as a derivative of the verb (^}^) to build, is here still more appropriate. Most interpreters give the last word the vague sense of a, palace, considered as a splendid building. There is something, however, far more striking in the translation te?nple, found in the Prayer-Book and the ancient versions. The omission of the article ia a poetic license of perpetual occurrence. The temple was the ^eat ai'chitecturai model and standard of comparison, and particularly remarkable for the great size and skilful elaboration of its PSALM   CXL IV. 29\ foundation-stones, some of which, there is reason to believe, have remained undisturbed since the time of Solomon. See Kobinson's Palestine, vol. i, pp. 422—426.

<!-- PAGE 300 -->
13. Our garners full^ affording from kind to kind ; our flocks hearing thousands^ 7?iultiplied by myriads, in our streets. From kind to kind seems to denote not only variety but regular succession, as expressed in Hengstenberg's version, one kind after an^ other. Compare Ps. Ixxxiv. 8 (7.) The participles in the next clause are highly idiomatic and scarcely reproducible in any other language. A somewhat similar example occurs above, Ps. Ixix. 32 (31.) But there both forms are active, whereas here we have one active and one passive participle, formed directly from the Hebrew words denoting a thousand and a myriad, the last of which is a derivative of the verb to increase or multiply^ and would therefore necessarily suggest that idea. See above, on Ps. iii. 7 (6.) Ixviii. 18 (17.) Streets, though not incorrect, is an inadequate translation of the Hebrew word (ni:£^h), which means external spaces, streets as opposed to the insido of houses, fields or country as opposed to a whole town. Hert it includes not only roads but fields.

14. Our oxen loaded—no damage and no loss—and lo complaint in our streets. The first particular implies abundanoo. For the use of oxen as beasts of burden, see 1 Chr. xii. 40. Damage and loss, literally, breach and going forth. Complaint, liierally, ciy, but especially for loss of the fruits of the earth. See Is&i. xxiv. 11. Some give the sentence an entirely different meaning, by supposing the word translated oxeii to mean princes, as it does in Zech. ix. 7. xii. 5, 6, and giving the participle joined with it the Chaldee sense of raised erect or upright. Going out then means going out to war, as in Am. v. 3, breach the incursion of an enemy, and cry a war-cry. But the fij-st Hebrew word in question (^^^^) is applied Dnly to the chiefs of Edom (Gen. xxxvi. 15), except in the latest books of the Old Testament, such as Zechariah ; and we naturally look for oxen after sheep, as in Ps. viii. S (7.)

<!-- PAGE 301 -->
15. Happy the people (with) whom (it is) thus! Happy the people whose God (is) Jehovah ! The clauses are not antitlietical but equivalent. The people means the (chosen) people^ Israel, with whom, in prosperous times, it was thus, and was thus for the very reason that Jehovah was their God.
