<!-- psalm 149 | vol 3 | scan pages 319-321 -->

<!-- PAGE 319 -->
This may be regarded as the special song of praise required of Israel at the close of the preceding psalm; first, on account of mercies already experienced by the chosen people, vs. 1—5, and then, in the hope of future triumphs over all heathen and hostile powers, vs. 6—9. Nothing could well be more appropriate to the state of things under Nehemiah, when the city and nation had again been put into a posture of defence and resistance.

1. Hallelujah ! Sing unto Jehovah a new song, his praise in the congregation of saints. Compare Ps. xl. 4 (3.) xcvi. I. cxi. 1. cxiviii. 14, to which, last there is an obvious allusion, cionnecting die two psalms in the closest manner.

3. JLet Israel rejoicz in his Maker !   Let the so^ds of Zion triumph tn their King ! Not merely the creator of individuals, but of the church and nation as such, and thai not only at first, but by a kind of new creation, in the restoration-of the people from captivity. They are summoned to rejoice in him, not only as their founder and restorer but their sovereign. See above, on Ps. xcv. 6. c. 3. cxlv. 1, and compare Isai. xliii. 1. xliv. 2. xlv. 13.

<!-- PAGE 320 -->
3. Let them praise his name in the dance; with timbrel and harp let them play (or 7}iake music) to him. The usual modes of expressing joy are here combined. As to the dance, see above, on Ps. XXX  12 (11.)

4. For Jehovah is pleased icith his people; he Itautifies the humhle with salvation. The first clause suggests the idea of a previous alienation and of his having been appeased or reconciled. See above, on Ps. Ixxxv. 2(1.) The verb is one applied in the Law to God's acceptance of the sacrifices, and might therefore awaken here associations with atonement and forgiveness. Seo above, on Ps. xix. 15 (14.) li. 22 (20.) The verb occurs in iti general sense of bemg pleased or satisfied, Ps. cxlvii. 10, 11 With the last clause compare Isai. Ixi. 3.

5. Let the saints exult in gloi'y ; let them sing (for joy) upon their beds. The word translated saints is the same that occurs in Ps. cxlviii. 14, and is there explained. In glory (or honour), i. e. the glorious or honourable state into which Jehovah has now brought them. The glory is not that which belongs to God, Ps. xxix. 9. xcvi. 7, but that which he bestows, Ps. Ixxxiv. 12 (11.) Ixxxv. 10 (9.) The very phrase, in honour, occurs above, Ps. cxii. 9. Sing or shout, as audible expressions of strong feeling, and especially of joy. On their beds, where they have been accustomed to lament their previous degradation, or what Nehemiah calls their " affliction and reproach." See Neh. i. 3. iii. 36 (iv. 4.)

<!-- PAGE 321 -->
6. Praises of God in their throaty and a tico-edged sword in their hand. A striking coincidence has been observed between tins verse and Neh. iv. 11, 12 (17, IS.) As then they worked with one hand and brandished the sword with the other, so now they might be said at the same time to praise Grod and defy their enemies. This singular mixture of devotional and martial spirit is characteristic of the psalm and furnishes a valuable index to the date of composition. The conclusion thus reached is corroborated by the account of the military and religious pomp, with which the walls were dedicated, as described by Nehemiah (xii. 31—47.)

7. To execute vengeance among the nations^ punishments among the peoples. Not their own vengeance, but that of God, to whom alone it appertains. See above, on Ps. xviii. 48 (47.) xciv. 1, and compare Deut. xxxii. 35. Rom. xii. 19. Heb. x. 30. This is really nothing more than a prediction, that God would use his peoj le as his instruments in punishing the nations by whom they had themselves been persecuted and oppressed. This was partially fulfilled in the successes of the Maccabees, but under a new and unexpected form, in the spiritual triumphs of the true religion, and its actual or prospective subjugation of the world.

8. To bind their Jdngs with chains^ their nobles with fetters of iron. The word translated nobles is properly a participle, meanin<T honoured (ones.) The verse simply carries out the idea of the one before it, that of the subjugation of the gentiles by the true religion. The objection to this, as a spiritualizing explanation of the text, springs from a narrow and erroneous view of the very end for which Israel existed as a nation. Those promises to Israel, which are not still available for us, were but of temporary local value.

9. To execute among them the judgment written. An honour is that for all his saints.    This last phrase occurs also at the close of
