<!-- psalm 15 | vol 1 | scan pages 130-131 -->

<!-- PAGE 130 -->
the latter is the prominent idea, as the paral elism of the clauses shows. Oh that the salvation of Israel were come! corresponds exactly to, May Jacob exult, may Israel be glad ! The common version is forbidden by the optative form (bjP) of the Hebrew verb, and by the masoretic interpunction, which connects in the Lord's returning <J*c, not with what follows as a specification of time, but with what goes before as an explanatory clause. The whole may be paraphrased as follows. ' Oh that Jehovah, from his throne in Zion, would grant salvation to his people, by revisiting them in their captive and forsaken state, and that occasion of rejoicing might be thus afforded to the church!' Or more closely thus: * Oh may Israel's salvation (soon) come forth from Zion, in Jehovah's return to the captivity of his people! (In such a restoration) may Jacob (soon have reason to) exult ard Israel (to) triumph! PSALM   XY.

This Psalm teaches the necessity of moial purity as a condition of the divine protection. It first propounds the question who shall be admitted to God's household and the privileges of its inmates, v. 1. This is answered- positively, v. 2, and negatively, v. 3, then positively again, v. 4, and negatively, v. 5. The last clause of the last verse winds up by declaring, that the character just described shall experience the protection tacitly referred to in the first verse. As the contrast exhibited in this psalm and the fourteenth may account for its position  in  the   Psalter,   so   its  obvious  resemblance   to   the twenty-fourth  makes it  not improbable that their  historical occasion was identical.

<!-- PAGE 131 -->
1. A Psalm by David. Jehovah, who shall sojourn i?i thy tent ? who shall dwell in thy hill of holiness ? The holy hill is Zion, as in Ps. ii. 6 ; the tent is the tabernacle which David pitched there for the ark, when he removed it from Gibeon. (2 Sam. vi. 17. 1 Chron. xv. 1. xvi. 1, 39. 2 Chron. i. 3—5.) Both together signify the earthly residence of God. See above, on Ps. iii. 5 (4). The idea is not that of frequenting Zion as a place of worship, but of dwelling there, as a guest or as an inmate of God's family. The same figure for intimate communion with Jehovah, and participation of his favour, reappears in Ps. xxiii. 6. xxvii. 4, 5. xxiv. 3. lxi. 5. lxv. 5 (4.) Ixxxiv. 5 (4.) So too in Eph. ii. 19, believers are described as members of God's family (olxsloi rov Oeov.)

2. Walking perfect, and doing right, and speaking truth, %n his heart. The Psalmist, speaking in behalf of God, here answers his own question. The only person who can be admitted to domestic intercourse with God is one walking perfect &c. Walking is put for the habitual course of life. (See above, on Ps. i. 1.) Perfect, complete, as to all essential features of the character, without necessarily implying perfection in degree. The form of expression seems to be borrowed from Gen. xvii. 1. A remarkably analogous expression is that used by Horace : integer vitae scelerisque purus. The next phrase, doing right, practising rectitude, may be either a synonymous parallel to the first, or a specification under it, parallel to speaking truth. The general idea of walking perfect is then resolved into the two particular ideas of doing right and speaking truth. In his heart, i. e. sincerely, as opposed to outward show or hypocritical profession. This phrase seems to qualify not merely what precedes, speaking truth, but the whole da
