<!-- psalm 150 | vol 3 | scan pages 322-324 -->

<!-- PAGE 322 -->
the preceding psalm (cxlviii. 14). As written may mean written in the book of G-od's decrees, there is no need of supposing a reference to any part of scripture. If there be such reference, however, it is no doubt to the threatening in Deut. xxxii. 41—43. To act as God's instruments in this great judicial process, so far from being a disgrace or hardship, is an honour reserved for all the objects of his mercy and subjects of his grace. The psalm ends as it began, with Hallelujah ! P S A L M   C L .

Tins is the closing Hallelujah or Doxology, which marks the conclusion of the last series or cycle (Ps. cxlvii—cl), of the Fifth Book (Ps. cvii—cl), and of the whole Psalter. In form and structure it is perfectly simple, merely reciting, in an animated manner, the place (v. 1), the theme (v. 2), the mode (vs. 3—5), and the extent (v. 6) of the praise due to Jehovah.

1. Hallelujah ! Praise God in his sanctuary ! Praise him in tht firmament of his -power ! The essential meaning of the verse is, praise him both in earth and heaven. The particulars detailed in Ps. cxlviii are here condensed into a pregnant summary. The sanctuary is the earthly one, and as such stands opposed to the firmament or heaven^ called the firmament of his power^ as being one of the most glorious proofs and products of its exercise, and still the scene of its most striking exhibitions. The phrase is to be understood as comprehending the hosts of heaven^ both inanimate and living, both material and spiritual.    The parallelism is rendered stiil more perfect by the correspondence between jpower in the last clause and (b5<\ the divine name in the first.

<!-- PAGE 323 -->
2. Praise him for /m mighty acts ! Praise him according to his plenitude of greatness ! His mighty acts, literally, his mights or powers. See above, on Ps. cxlv. 4. jPor, literally, in them, i. e. praisG him as exhibited and viewed in these. The corresponding particle means like, in accordance with, in proportion to, in a manner worthy of his greatness. The last phrase in Hebrew is peculiarly expressive, consisting of the two strongest terms denoting magnitude, the abstract forms of miich and greut, which might be rendered, if our usage suffered it, muchness of greatness.

3. Praise him with blast of trumpet! Praise hhn with harji and lyre ! Here begins an enumeration of the instruments employed in public worship, and therefore necessarily associated with the idea of divine praise. The trumpet was used to assemble the people, and would therefore excite many of the same associations with our church-bells. The other instruments were used as actual accompaniments of the psalms performed in public worship.

4. Praise him with timbrel and dance ! Praise him with strings and pipe! The three great classes of instruments are here distinctly mentioned, namely, wind, stringed, and pulsatile. The last, represented by the drum or timbrel, still called by a kindred name in Arabic, is here accompanied by its inseparable adjunct darxing, which might seem misplaced in a list of instruments, and those employed in sacred music, but for the peculiar usages and notions of the ancient Hebrews, with respect to this external sign of joy. See above, on Ps. xxx. 12 (11.) cxlix. 3. Tho eomrnc   version of the last word (organ) is derived through the Vulgate from the Septuagint, where it denotes a system or combination of pipes. The Hebrew word, according to the Jewish tradition, means a simple pipe, and is so rendered in the Prayer Book version. It here represents the whole class of windinstruments. See above, on Ps. Ixviii. 26 (25), and compare 2 Sam. vi. 5.

<!-- PAGE 324 -->
5. Praise him with cymbals of loud sound ! Praise him with cymbals of joyful noise ! The dominant idea, that of audibly expressed joy, is sustained to the ]ast, where the cymbals are mentioned in both clauses, as an instrument peculiarly appropriated to occasions of unusual rejoicing. See 2 Sam. vi. 5. Ezr. iii. 10. Neh, xii. 27. The effect is still further heightened by the qualifying epithets, the first of which strictly denotes hearing or the thing heard, i. e. sound, and here by implication, loud sound. To this idea the parallel term adds that of joyful Bound, to which it is constantly applied in usage. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 6. Ixxxix. 16 (15), and compare Num. xxiii. 21. The distinction, here assumea by some interpreters, between cymbals of a larger and a smaller size, is wholly unnecessary.

6. Let all breath praise Jah ! Hallelujah! The very am biguity of all breath gives extraordinary richness of meaning to this closing sentence. From the simple idea of wind instruments, mentioned in the context, it leads us, by a beautiful transition, to that of vocal, articulate, intelligent praise, uttered by the breath of living men, as distinguished from mere lifeless instruments. See above, on Ps. Ixviii. 26 (25.) Then lastly, by a natural association, we ascend to the idea expressed in the common version, every thing that hath breathy not merely all that lives, but all that has a voice to praise God. There is nothing in the Psalter more majestic or more beautiful than this brief but most significant finale^ in which solemnity of tone predominates, without 316 PSALM   ei. however in the least disturbing tJie exhilaration which the close of the Psalter seems intended to produce, as if in emblematical allusion to the triumph which awaits the church and all its members, when through much tribulation th(»y shall enter into rert. TKI lIfJ>.
