<!-- psalm 16 | vol 1 | scan pages 132-133 -->

<!-- PAGE 132 -->
ecription, as of one who sincerely and internally, as well as outwardly, leads a blameless life by doing right and speaking truth.

3. (Who) hath not slandered tvith his tongue, (who) hath not done his neighbour harm, and a scandal hath not taken up against his neighbour. The positive description of the foregoing verse is now followed by a negative one. (Compare Ps i. 1, 2.) The social virtues are insisted on, and their opposites excluded, because they are apt to be neglected by hypocrites, against whom this psalm is directed. The past tense of the verbs denotes a character already marked and determined by the previous course of life. The verb ^m seems strictly to denote the act of busy or officious tale-bearing. There seems to be an allusion to Lev. xix. 16. With his tongus, literally on his tongue, as we say to live on, i. e. by means of any thing, an idiom which occurs in Gen. xxvii. 40. (Compare Isai. xxxviii. 16.) The next clause adds deed to word, as in the foregoing verse. Scandal, reproach, defamatory accusation. The verb jse} is by some explained as meaning to take up upon the lips (Ps. xvi. 4), and then to utter or pronounce. Others give it the same sense as in Gen.xxxi. 17 where b? 8S53 means to lift up upon, i. e. to burden. The idea then is, that he has not helped to load his neighbour with reproach. Friend and neighbour does not mean any other man, but one sustaining a peculiarly intimate relation, such as that of the members of the chosen people to each other. See above, on Ps. xii. 3 (2).

4. Despised in his eyes (is) a reprobate, and the fearers oj Jehovah he will honour; he hath sworn to his own hurt ana will not change. The Chaldee Paraphrase, followed by the Prayer Bx>k version, makes the first clause descriptive of humility.    He is despised in his own eyes (and) rejected.    But th« tl0 PSALM   XV. parallelism with the next clause shows that a contrast wat designed between his estimation of two opposite classes, and as one of these is those who fear Jehovah, the other must be represented by txsfol, rejected, i. e. by Jehovah, reprobate. The future form, as usual, suggests the idea of a present act repeated or continued in the future. He honours, and will still persist in honouring, the fearers of Jehovah. The Septuagirt and Vulgate explain annb to the neighbour, and some modern versions to the bad {man) But the sense is determined by the obvious allusion to Lev. v. 4 : " if a soul swear to do evil (S'ln'b) or to do good," i. e. whether to his own advantage or the contrary. So here the phrase must mean ' he hath sworn to injure (himself)' not designedly, but so as to produce that effect. He will not change, literally, exchange, i. e. substitute some* thing else for what he has promised.

<!-- PAGE 133 -->
5. His silver he hath not given for usury, and a bribe against a guiltless (person) hath not taken. Doing these (things) he shall not be moved forever. In Hebrew as in French, silver is put for money in general. There is obvious alluxuon to the frequent prohibition in the Mosaic law, not of lending money upon interest for commercial purposes, a practice then unknown, but of usurious lending to the poor, and especially to poor Israelites. See Ex. xxii. 24. Lev. xxv. 37. Deut. xxiii. 20, and compare Prov. xxviii. 8. Ezek. xviii. 8. The taking of judicial bribes is also expressly forbidden in Ex. xxiii. 8. Deut. xvi. 19. xxvii. 25. The masoretic interpunction of this sentence seems to be merely rhythmical or musical, as in Ps. xi. 5. The words doing these cannot be separated from what follows without destroying the sense. This last clause is an answer to the question in v. 1, but with a Change of form, implying that admission to God's household (vas itself security against all danger. Compare Ps. lv. 23 (22) For the sense of ttifi^L see above, on Ps. x 6. xiii. 5.
