<!-- psalm 17 | vol 1 | scan pages 134-135 -->

<!-- PAGE 134 -->
PSALM  XVI.

A sufferer, in imminent danger of death, expresses his strong confidence in God, v. 1, as the sole source, and author o' his happiness, v. 2, and at the same time his attachment tc God's people, v. 3, his abhorrence of all other gods, v. 4, his acquiescence in God's dealings with him, vs. 5, 6, and his assured hope of future safety and blessedness, vs. 7—11.

The Psalm is appropriate to the whole class of pious sufferers, of which Christ is the most illustrious representative. It is only in him, therefore, that some parts of it can be said to have received their highest and complete fulfilment. This wilbe shown more fully in the exposition of the ninth and tenth verses.

1. Michtam of David. Preserve me, oh God, for I have trusted in thee. Some explain Michtam as a compound term ; but it is most probably a simple derivative of a verb meaning to hide, and signifies a mystery or secret. The similar word Michtab in the title of Hezekiah's psalm (Isai. xxxviii. 9) is probably an imitation of the form here used, or at least involves an allusion to it. Tt seems to be substituted for the usual terms song, psalm, &c. not only here but in the titles of Ps. Iv'1—lx. It probably indicates the depth of doctrinal and spiritual import in these sacred compositions. The derivation from a noun meaning gold is much less probable.—This verse may be said to contain the sum and substance of the whole psalm, and is merely amplified in what follows.    The prayer, Keep, save, or H2 PSALM   XVT. preserve me, implies actual suffering or imminent danger, while the last clause, I have trusted in thee, states the ground of his assured hope and confident petition. The verb used is one that seems especially appropriate to the act of seeking shelter under some overshadowing object. See Judges ix. 15. Isai. xxx. 2. Ps. lvii. 2 (1.) lxi. 5 (4.) The preterite form implies that this is no new or sudden act, but one performed already He not only trusts in God at present, but has trusted him before.    Compare Ps. vii. 2 (1.) xi, 1.

<!-- PAGE 135 -->
2. Thou hast said to Jehovah, The Lord (art) thou ; my good (is) not besides thee (or beyond thee) The verb in the first clause has the form of a second person feminine, which some regard as an abbreviation of the first person, snft& for ^frtEH and translate accordingly, I have said. But this neither agrees so well with usao;e. nor affords so s;ood a sense as the old construction which supplies as the object of address the same that is expressed in Ps. xlii. 6 (5), 12 (11). xliii. 5. Jer. iv. 19. Lam. iii. 24, 25. A similar ellipsis is assumed by some in 1 Sam. xxiv. 11, and 2 Sam. xiii. 39. By this peculiar form of speech the Psalmist calls upon himself to remember his own solemn acknowledgment of Jehovah as the Loud or Supreme God.—The obscure clause which follows has been very variously explained. Some understand by good moral goodness, merit, and explain the whole to mean, * my goodness is not such as to entitle me to thy regard.' Most interpreters however give to good its usual sense of good fortune, happi ness (see Ps. cvi. 5. Job ix. 25), and make the whole clause mean, ■ my happiness is not obligatory or incumbent on thee, thou art not bound to provide for it' ; or ' my happiness is not above thee ; I have no higher happiness than thee.' The true sense is probably afforded by a modification of this last : • my happiness is not beside thee, independent of, or separable lrom t.hee,' with allusion to the form of expression in the Hebrew of
