<!-- psalm 18 | vol 1 | scan pages 136-176 -->

<!-- PAGE 136 -->
the first commandment (Ex xx. 3.) The verse then contains a twofold acknowledgment of God, as the universal sovereign, and as the only source of individual enjoyment. Compare Ps. lxxiii. 25. That this recognition was not a mere momentary act, but a habitual affection of the mind, seems to be indicated by the Psalmist's appeal to his own soul as having made the acknowledgment already, hitherto or heretofore.

3. To (or with) the saints who {are) in the land, and the nobles in whom (is) all my delight. The construction of the first clause, and its connexion with the preceding verse, are very obscure. Some make to synonymous with as to. ' As to the saints who are in the land, and the nobles, in them is all my delight.' Or, ' as to the saints who are in the land, they are the nobles in whom is all my delight.' Others understand to the saints and to Jehovah as correlative expressions. * To Jehovah I have said thus ; to the saints thus.' Or, as the English Bible has it, ' my goodness extendeth not to thee, but to the saints &c.' The least violent construction seems to be that which takes the preposition in its usual sense, that of belonging to, as in the phrases, to David, to the chief Musician, and in 1 Kings xv. 27. The meaning then is that the Psalmist's recognition of Jehovah as The Lord, and as the only source of happiness, is not peculiar to himself, but common to the whole body of the saints or holy ones. This epithet denotes personal character, not as its primary meaning, but as the effect of a peculiar relation to God, as the objects of his choice, set apart from the rest of men for this very purpose. See Ex. xix. 6. Deut. vii. 6. Ps. xxxiv. 10 (9.) Dan. vii. 21. viii. 24. 1 Pet. ii. 9. The pre-eminence of these over others, as the fruit of the divine election, is expressed by the word nobles, which like saints denotes moral character only in an indirect and secondary manner. The construction in this part of the verse is strongly idiomatic ; the literal, translation is, the nobles of all my delight ilk them. Under the old dispensation, the nobles or elect of God had their local habitation in the land of promise. Hence they are here described as the • saints or.consecrated ones who are in the land,' not in the earth, which would be too indefinite and not so well suited to the context. As thus explained, the whole verse may be paraphrased as follows. ■ This profession of my trust in God I make, not merely as an individual believer, but as one belonging to the great body of the saints or consecrated ones, the nobles of the human race, not such by any original or natural pre-eminence, but by the sovereign and distinguishing favour of Jehovah, whom they trast as I do, and are therefore the rightful objects of my warmest love.'

<!-- PAGE 137 -->
4. Ma?iy (or multiplied) shall be their sorrows—another they have purchased—I ivill not pour their drink-offering of blood, and ivill not take their names upon my lips. With the happiness of those who like himself trust the Lord, he contrasts the wretchedness of those who have chosen any other object of supreme affection. The relative construction in the English version, ' their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten &c.,' gives the sense correctly, but with more variation from the Hebrew idiom, which conveys the same idea by means of short independent propositions.—In the word translated their sorrows (t3tVl2l$S')there seems to be an allusion to a very similar form which would mean their idols ( dn^SS), as if to suggest that false ijods are mere troubles and vexations.—Another means another god, in opposition to the one true God, Jehovah, as in Isai. xlii. 8. xlviii. 11. The contrast which is there expressed is here to be supplied from vs. 2 and 5, and from the general antithesis, running through the context, between God and gods, not idols merely, but any created object of supreme affection. The verb intt in its derived forms means to hasten, and is so ~T translated here by the English and some other versions.    But in the only other place where the primitive verb occurs (Ex. xxii. 15) it means to endoiv a wife, or secure her by the payment of a dowry, according to the ancient oriental custom. The same usao'e of the verb exists in several of the connate dialects. It seems Here to have the general sense of purchasing, by costly sacrifice or self-denial, but with particular allusion to the conjugal relation which is constantly described in scripture as existing between worshippers and their gods. See Hos. iii. 2. and viii. 9. Ezek. xvi. 33, 34. In the last clause he abjures all communion with such idolaters. He will not join in their impious services, nor even name the names of their divinities. Drink' offerings of blood, libations no less loathsome than if composed of human blood, perhaps with an allusion to the frequent poetical description of wine as the blood of the grape. See Gen. xlix. 11. Deut. xxxii. 14. Isai. lxiii. 3. To take the name .upon the lips is to stain or pollute them by pronouncing it. Both here and in Hos. ii. 19, there is an obvious allusion to the solemn prohibition of the law (Ex. xxiii. 13) : " Make no mention of the name of other gods,-neither let it be heard out of thy mouth." The pronoun their, in this whole clause, refers not to the wor shippers but to their divinities, as comprehended under the collective term another.

<!-- PAGE 138 -->
5. Jehovah (is) my alloted portion and my cup; thou wilt enlarge my lot. The other side of the contrast is again exhibited. The idea is that in the Lord the Psalmist has all that he can wish or hope for. The figures are borrowed from the legular supply of food and drink. Compare Ps. xi. 6. xxiii. 5. There may also be allusions to the language of the Pentateuch in reference to the tribe of Levi. Deut. x. 9. xviii. 1, 2.—The common version of the last clause, thou upholdest my lot, is neither bo grammatical nor yields so good a sense as that above given, where enlarge implies both honour and abundance, and tha * ture form expresses confident assurance that the favour now .'   perienced will be continued.

<!-- PAGE 139 -->
6. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant things (or pleasani 'places) ; yea, my heritage is goodly. The lines here spoken of are those used in measuring and dividing land. Fallen, i. e assigned, with or without allusion to the lot, as the means of distribution. Compare Num. xxxiv. 2. Judges xviii. 1. The idea of places is suggested by the context, or the plural adjective may have the abstract sense of pleasure, pleasures, like the cognate form in Job xxxvi. 11.—The particle (cjh) which introduces the last clause is more emphatic than the simple copulative and. It properly means also, and implies that this clause contains something more than that before it. The original construction of the last clause is : a heritage is goodly to me or upon me, with allusion to the natural and common image of gifts or favours as descending from above. The heritage or portion thus described is God himself, but considered as including all desirable possessions.

7. 1 will bless Jehovah who hath counselled me; also by night have my reins prompted me. lie praises God for having counselled or persuaded him to choose this goodly heritage in preference to every other portion.—The second clause begins with yea or also, as in the preceding verse. It here implies that under the divine control just mentioned, his own habitual dispositions tended to the same point.—By night, literally, nights, an idiom not unknown in vulgar English. The plural may in this case be emphatic, meaning whole nights, all night long. The night is mentioned, both as a time naturally favourable to reflection, and as showing that the same subject occupied his thoughts by night as well as by day. See above on Ps. i. 2. The reins are figuratively put like the heart, bowels Sec. for the affections. See above, on Ps. vii. 10 (9).—My rei?is hav« taught me, warned me, prompted me, to utter the praise mentioned in the first clause, or to make the choice described in vs I, 2  5. PSALM   XVI. U7

<!-- PAGE 140 -->
8. I have set Jehovah before me always ; because {he is) at my light hand, I shall not be moved. I have set him before me, i. e. I recognise his presence and confide in his protection. The actual expression of this confidence is given in the other clause. The right hand is here mentioned not as a post ol honour, but as that of a guard or defender. See below, on Ps. cix. 31. ex. 5. exxi. 5.—I shall not be moved from my secure position. See above, on Ps. x. 6. xv. 5. The whole verse is a varied repetition and amplification of the last clause of v. 1, 1 have trusted (or sheltered myself) in thee.—The Septuagint version of this sentence is quoted in Acts ii. 25, with an express recognition of David as the author of the Psalm.

9. Therefore has rejoiced my heart and exulted my glory ; yea, my flesh shall dwell in security (or confidence)—Therefore, because God is my ever present helper. Glory seems ^iere to mean his nobler part, his soul, but not as wholly separate from the body, as appears from what follows. See above, on Ps. vii. 6 (5.)—Flesh may either mean the body, as distinguished from the soul, or the whole person as including both. Compare Ps. lxiii. 2 (1.) lxxxiv. 3 (2.)—The idea of dwelling in security or confidence of safety is borrowed from the Pentateuch. See Deut. xxxiii. 12. 28, and compare Judges xviii. 7. Jer. xxiii. 6. xxxiii. 16. A similar allusion has been found already in Ps. iv. 9. (8.) The Septuagint version of the sentence, although it substitutes tongue for glory, is substantially correct, and therefore retained in Acts ii. 26.—The second clause is not Bimply parallel and equivalent to the first, but is rather an actual performance of the duty there described. Having there said that his heart did triumph in the certainty of God's protection, he here proves the truth of his assertion, by professing his assured hope that his whole person, not excepting his materia", part, shall dwell in safety under that protection. This ia applicable both to preseivation from death and preservation in death, and may theiefore without violence be understood, in a lower sense, of David, who did die and see corruption but whose body is to rise again, as well as in a higher sense of Christ, whose body, though it died, was raised again before it saw corruption.

<!-- PAGE 141 -->
10. For thou wilt not leave my soul to Hell; thou wilt not give thy Holy One to see corruption. He now assigns the ground or reason of the confidence expressed in the preceding verse. • I am sure my soul and body will be safe, because thou canst not, without ceasing to be God and my God, give me up to the destroyer.' He does not say leave in, but to, i. e. abandon to, give up to the dominion or possession of another. The same Hebrew phrase occurs, with the same sense, in Lev. xix. 10. Job xxxix. 14, and in Ps. xlix. 11 (10) below.—Hell is here to be taken in its wide old English sense, as correspondin"- to the Hebrew Sheol and the Greek Hades, the invisible world or state of the dead. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5) and ix. 18 (17.)—Give i. e. permit, or more emphatically, give up, abandon, which makes the parallelism of the clauses more exact. Thy Holy One, or more exactly, thy favourite, the object of thy special favour. See above, on Ps. iv. 4 (3.) The textual reading is a plural form ("p-jiDn), the singular (-pion) being a marginal correction or keri. The Jews contend for the former and most Christians for the latter, which is favoured by the oldest versions and retained in the New Testament. The essential difference between the two is less than it may seem at first sight, since even the singular is really collective and includes the whole class of God's chosen and favoured ones, of whom Christ is the head and representative.— To see, i. e. to experi ence or undergo corruption. Compare the phrase to see death, Luke ii. 26.—It has been disputed whether rftltti is derived from md and means a pit, or from r,nd and means corruption. Both allegations are probably true, the antecedent improbability oi PSALM   XVI. H9 §uch a double sense and derivation being counterbalanced by the clear analogy of nna, which is of a different sense and gender as derived from tirii and n^. The use of this equivocal expression may have been intentional, in order to make it applicable both to David and to Christ. (See above, on the preceding verse.) To both, the words contain a promise of deliverance from death, but in the case of Christ with a specific reference to his actual escape from the corruption which is otherwise inseparable from dissolution. Believers in general are saved from the perpetual dominion of death, but Christ was saved even from the first approach of putrefaction. In this peculiar and mo-:', pregnant sense the words are applied to Christ exclusively by two apostles, and in that sense declared to be inapplicable to David. (Actsii. 29—31. xiii. 35—37.) Their reasoning would utterly forbid the application to any lower subject, were it not for the ambiguity or twofold meaning of the Hebrew word, which cannot therefore be explained away without embarrassing the interpretation of this signal prophecy.

<!-- PAGE 142 -->
11. Thou wilt teach me the ivay of life, fulness of joy with thy face (or presence?) pleasures in thy right hand forever. He trusts God not only for deliverance from death, but for guidance in the way to life, or blessed immortality. (Compare Prov. ii. 19.) The Hebrew verb is causative and means thou wilt make me knoiv, point out, or show to me. Fulness, satiety, or rather satisfaction, in its strongest sense, including the ideas of contentment and abundance. The plural, Joys, denotes not only richness but variety. The next phrase may simply mean before thy face or in thy presence. But it will also bear a stronger sense and represent God's presence or the sight of him, not merely as the place, but the source of enjoyment. See above, on Ps. iv. 7 (6,) and compare Ps. xvii. 15. lxxx. 4 (3.) So in the last clause, the idea is not merely at thy right hand a« a place of honour and of safety, but in thy right hand as A20 PSALM  XVII. the depository of eternal joys, or with thy right hand, as the instrument by which they are dispensed. See below, on Ps. xvii. 7.—This last clause is omitted in Peter's citation of the passage, Acts ii. 27, no doubt because it is a mere poetical reite/ation of the one before it, which is itself only added to complete the period, and not because it was essential to the apostle's purpose. That purpose was accomplished by applying the two preceding verses to our Saviour, not exclusively indeed, but by way of eminence and in a peculiar sense, which we learn however from Acts ii. 30, 31, was actually present to the mind of the inspired Psalmist. The same argumentative interpretation of the prophecy is given by Paul in Acts xiii. 35—37. PSALM   XVII.

<!-- PAGE 143 -->
A sufferer, in imminent danger, professes his sincere conformity to God's will, and invokes his favour and protection, vs. 1—5. This petition is enforced by an appeal to former mercies, vs. 6, 7, and a description of the wickedness of his enemies, vs. 8—12, whose character and spirit he contrasts with his own vs. 13—15.

The position of this Psalm in the collection seems to have been determined by the resemblance of its subject, tone, and diction, to those of the sixteenth, with which it may be said to form a pair or double psalm, like the first and second, third and fourth, ninth and tenth, &c.

1. A Fraye? By David. Hear oh Jehovah, the right, tiearken to my cry, give ear to my prayer not with lips of PSALM  XVII 12) deceit. This psalm is called a prayer because petition is its burden, its characteristic feature, its essential element. By David, literally, to David, i. e. belonging to him as its author, — The right, righteousness or justice in the abstract, here put for a just cause, or perhaps for one who is in the right, who has justice on his side. The prayer that God will hear the right implies that no appeal is made to partiality or privilege, but merely to the merits of the case. The righteousness claimed is not merely that of the cause but that of the person, not inherent but derived from the impitted righteousness of faith according to the doctrine of the Old as well as the New Testament. The quality alleged is not that of sinless perfection but that of sincere conformity to the divine will.—The last clause, not with lips of deceit, applies to all that goes before, and represents sincerity as necessary to acceptance. The original expression is still stronger and conveys much more than a negative. It does not merely say, not with deceitful lips, but more positively with lips not deceitful.

<!-- PAGE 144 -->
2. From before thee my judgment shall come forth ; thine eyes shall behold equities. This sentence really involves a prayer, but in form it is the expression of a confident hope. From before thee, from thy presence, thy tribunal. My judgment, my acquittal, vindication; or my justice, i. e. my just cause, my cause considered as a just one. Shall come forth, to the view of others, shall be seen and recognised in its true character, as being what it is. * The reason is, because God's judgments are infallible. His eyes cannot fail to see innocence or righteousness where it exists. The plural, rectitudes or equities^ is an emphatic abstract. See above, on the parallel passage, Ps. xi 7.

3. Thou hast tried my heart, hast visited (me) by night, hast assayed me ; thou wilt not find ; my mouth shall not ex? ceed 9?i7/ thought. He still appeals to God as the judge and witness of his own sincerity. The preterites represent the process as no new one, although still continued in the present. Visited for the purpose of examination or inspection, in which specific sense the English verb is often used. By night, as the time when men's thoughts are least under restraint, and when the evil, if there be any, is most certain of detection. Purged me, as the purity of metals is tested by fire, to which process the Hebrew word is specially applied. Thou shalt not find any thing at variance with the sincerity of this profession.—The future form implies that the investigation is to be continued, but without any change in the result.—The last clause is doubtful and obscure. The common version, I am purposed (that) my mouth shall not transgress, agrees well enough with the form of the words, but is forbidden by the accents. The reversed construction, my thoughts shall not exceed ray mouth or {speech), is ungrammatical ; nor does either of these constructions suit the context so well as the first, which makes the clause a renewed profession of  sincerity.

<!-- PAGE 145 -->
4. (As) to the icorks of man, by the word of thy lips I have kept the paths of the violent (transgressor). The works of man are the sinful courses to which man is naturally prone. The generic term man (tDis*) is often used in reference to the sinful infirmities of human nature. See 1 Sam. xxiv. 10 (9.) Hos. vi. 7. Job xxxi. 33. The word of God's lips is the word uttered by him, with particular reference to his precepts or commands, but including his entire revelation. By this word, by means of it as an instrument, and in reliance on it as an authority.—The verb (^^d) translated kept properly means watched, and is elsewhere applied to the observance of a rule, but in this place seems to mean watched for the purpose of avoiding, as wo say in English to keep away from or keep out of danger.—From the verb (V"iB) to break forth, elsewhere applied to gross iniquities (Hos. iv. 2), comes the adjective ("p^S) violent, outrageous here used as an epithet of the flagrant sinner.

<!-- PAGE 146 -->
5. My steps have laid hold of thy paths, my feet have not swerved. His profession of integrity is still continued. The first verb is in the infinitive form, but determined by the preterites before and after. The English language does not furnish equivalents to the parallel terms in Hebrew, both which denote footsteps. The common version violates the context by converting the first clause into a prayer, which would here be out of place.

6. I have invoked thee because thou wilt answer me, oh God! Incline thine ear to me, hear my speech. The alternation of the tenses is significant. ' I have invoked thee heretofore, and do so still, because I know that thou wilt hear me.' It is needless to observe how much the sentence is enfeebled by the change of either to the present.— Thou ivilt hear me, in the pregnant sense of hearing graciously or answering a prayer. See above, on Ps. iii. 5 (4.)—Oh (mighty) God! The divine name here used is the one denoting God's omnipotence. See above, Ps. v. 5 (4.) vii. 12 (11.) x. 11, 12. xvi. 1.—My speech, what I say, m>2K from ^faa to say. t :   • - T

7. Distinguish thy mercies, (oh thou) saving those trusting, from tlwse rising up, with thy right hand. The first verb is the same that occurs in Ps. iv. 4 (3.) Here, as there, it means to set apart, or single out, but with particular reference to extraordinary favours, implying an unusual necessity. Such mercy is described as perfectly in keeping with the divine mode of action in such cases.— Trusting, seeking refuge, i. e. in God. See above, on Ps. xvi. 1. The same ellipsis may be assumed after rising up, or we may supply against them.—With thy right hand, as the instrument of deliverance.    Compare Ps. xvi

<!-- PAGE 147 -->
11.     These  words  must  be connected in construction with saving.

8. Keep me as the apple of the eye, in the shadow of thy wings thou ivilt hide me. The first verb means to watch over, guard, preserve with care. See above, on v. 4, where it occurs in a figurative application. The pupil or apple of the eye is a proverbial type of that which is most precious and most easily injured, and which therefore has a double claim to sedulous protection. The original phrase is strongly idiomatic, exhibiting what seems to be a singular confusion of the genders. Its literal meaning is, supplying the articles omitted by poetic license, the man (or the little man, or the manlike part), the daughter of the eye. The first word has reference to the image reflected in the pupil, which is then described as belonging to the eye, by an oriental idiom which uses personal relations, son, daughter, Sec. to denote the mutual relations even of inanimate objects. The comparison is borrowed from Deut. xxxii. 10, where it is followed by another with the eagle's treatment of her young, to which there seems to be allusion in the last clause of the verse before us. The imperative form of the first verb is no reason for departing from the future form of the other, which is much more expressive. What he asks in one clause he expresses his assured hope of obtaining in the other.

9. From the face of the tricked who have wasted me ; mine enemies to the soul will surround me. The preceding sentence is continued, with a more particular description of the objecrs of his dread. ' Thou wilt hide me from the face, sight, or presence of the wicked.' Wasted, desolated, destroyed, with allusion perhaps to the siege of a town or the invasion of a country. The same term is applied to a dead man in Judg. v. 27. The enemies of the last clause are identical w/th the wicked of the first. Enemies in soul may mean cordial haters, or enemies who PSALM XVIT. 125 seek the soul or life, called deadly enemies in the English ver sion. Or ffl&'sa may be construed with the verb : surround me eagerly (with craving appetite) ; or surround me against my soul or life, i. e. with a view to take it.—The future form suggests that the danger which the first clause had described as past, was still present and likely to continue. As if he had said, ' from my wicked foes who have already wasted me, and will no doubt still continue to surround me.' In this description present danger is included, whereas if we substitute the present form, we lose the obvious allusion to the future and the pas*

<!-- PAGE 148 -->
10. Their fat they have closed; (with) their month they have spoken in pride. The first clause, though not exactly rendered, is correctly paraphrased in the English Bible : they are enclosed in their oivn fat. This is no uncommon metaphor in Scripture for moral and spiritual insensibility. See Deut. xxxii. 15. Job xv. 27. Ps. lxxiii. 7. cxix. 70. The literal sense of the expressions derives some illustration from Judg. hi, 22. Some give to fat the specific sense of heart, which it is said to have in Arabic: «their heart they have closed.' But the other explanation yields the same sense in a more emphatic form, and with closer conformity to Hebrew usage.

11. In our footsteps now have they surrounded us ; their eyes they will set, to go astray in the land. The meaning oi the first words, in our footsteps, seems to be, wherever we go. Compare Ps. exxxix. 3, 5. For the masoretic reading us, the text has me, which, although harsher, amounts to the same thing-, as the sufferer is an ideal person representing many real ones. The parallel clauses exhibit the usual combination of the preterite and future forms, implying that what had been done was likely to be still continued.— They fix their eyes, upon this as the end at which they aim. To go astray or turn aside, i. e. from the way of God's commandments, to which the Psalmist, in  v. 5, X26 PSALM   XVII. had declared his own adherence. The translations bowing doicn and casting down are less in accordance with the context and with the usage of the Hebrew verb, which is constantly employed to express departure from God and aberration from the path of duty. See 1 Kings xi. 9. Jou xxxi. 7. Ps. xliv. 19 (18.) cxix. 51,157. To the earth or in the earth, although grammatical, affords a less appropriate sense than in the land, i. e. the holy land or land of promise, the local habitation of God's people under the old economy. See above, on Ps. xvi. 3, and compare Tsaiah xxvi. 10.

<!-- PAGE 149 -->
12. His likeness (is) as a lion ; he is cravi?ig to tear ; and as a young lion sitting in secret places. The singular suffix refers to the enemy as an ideal person. The future (tpDM means that he is just about to feel or gratify the appetite for blood. To tear in pieces, as a wild beast does his prey before devouring it.—Sitting, lurking, lying in wait, with special reference to the patient promptness of the wild beast in such cases.—The comparison is the same as in Ps. x. 8—10.

13. Arise, Jehovah, go be/ore his face, make him bow, save my soul from the wicked (ivith) thy sword. On the meaning of the prayer that God would arise, see above on Ps. iii. 8 (7.) —Go before his face: the same Hebrew phrase occurs below (Ps. xcv. 2) in the sense of coming into one's presence. Here the context gives it the more emphatic sense of meeting, encountering, withstanding. Make him bend or bow, as the conquered dows beneath the conqueror.—The construction of thy sword seems to be the same with that of their mouth in v. 10. The Septuagint puts thy sword in apposition with my soul, the Vulgate with the word immediately preceding, men (who are) thy sword, as the Assyrian is said to be the rod in God's hand (Isai. x. 5.) But such a representation of the enemy as God's chosen   instruments,   instead  of   enforcing would  enfeeble the petition.— The verb translated save is a causative strictly mean* ing make to escape.

<!-- PAGE 150 -->
14. From men {with) thy hand, from the world ; their por Hon is in (this) life, and with thy hoard thou ivilt fill theil belly ; they shall have enough of so?zst and leave their residue to their babes. All the parts of this obscure verse have been variously explained. As in the preceding verse, some here read men {which are) thy hand, i. e. the instrument of thy wrath. The difficult expression n'bnto i* by some understood as a de scription of their character and spirit—men of the world—men who belong to it, and whose hearts are set upon it. Others give n"bn its primary meaning of duration and make the phrase descriptive of prosperity—men of duration or perpetuity—who not only prosper now, but have long done so, and seem likely to continue. The simplest construction is that given in the prayer-book version, which takes the preposition in the same sense before both nouns—"from the men, I say, and from the evil world." " World is then simply a collective equivalent to the plural men. This translation of the former word is justified by the analogy of Ps. xlix. 2 (1.)—Life is by some understood to mean a life of ease or pleasure; but this is far less natural than the obvious sense of this life, this present state as distinguished from futurity. The rest of the verse shows that their desires have not been disappointed. To the eye of sense God sometimes seems to have reserved his choicest gifts for the ungodly. Thy hidden {treasure), i. e. hoarded, carefully secreted. Fill their belly, satisfy their appetite. The future form implies that the state of things described is likely to continue.—The next clause may be also rendered : (their) sons shall be satisfied, and leave tJieir residue to their babes. This would be a strong description, of prosperity continued from generation to generation. According to the version before given, the men of the world are represented as having their largest wishes gratified not only in the number but the prosperous condition of their children. See Ps. cxxvii. 3. cxxviii. 3, 4. Job xxi. 111. The whole is only a description of things as they seem to man, before God's judgments interpose to change them.

<!-- PAGE 151 -->
15. I in righteousness shall see thy face ; I shall be satis- Hed in awaking with thy appearance. The pronoun expressed at the beginning of the sentence is emphatic. I, in opposition to the men described in the preceding verse. ' They may rejoice in richer providential gifts, and be satisfied with what they thus possess. But I enjoy what they do not, the sense of acceptance in thy sight, righteousness, justification, recognition as a righteous person.' The ambiguity of construction in the last clause is the same both in Hebrew and in English. The preposition with may connect what follows either with awaking or with satisfied. Thus the prayer-book version reads, 'and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it;' but the authorised version: " I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness." The latter construction is the one required by the accents and preferred by most interpreters, the rather as the last word does not mean resemblayice in the abstract, but form, shape, or visible appearance. Ex. xx. 4. Num. xii. 8. Deut. iv. 16, 23, 25. Job. iv. 16. The idea here suggested is the sight of thee, exactly corresponding to behold thy face, in the parallel clause.—In awaking, or when I shall awake, is understood by some to mean, when I awake to-morrow, and from this expression they infer that the psalm was originally composed, and intended to be used, as an evening-song or prayer. Sec above, on Ps. iii. 6 (5.) iv. 9 (8.) v. 4 (3.) Others give the phrase the same sense but a wider application ; in awaking, i. e. whenever I awake. As if he had said, while the men of the world think day and night of their possessions and their pleasures, I rejoice, whenever I awake, in the sight of God'6 reconciled countenance and the consciousness of friendship witb him.' A third interpretation puts a still higher sense upon the phrase as referring to the act of awaking from the sleep of death. But this excludes too much from view the enjoyment of God's favour and protection even here, which is the burden of the whole prayer. If the hope of future blessedness had been enough, the previous petitions would have been superfluous. The utmost that can be conceded to this view of the passage is that, by a natural association, what is is here said of awaking out of sleep in this life may be extended to that great awaking which awaits us all hereafter. The same state of mind and heart which enables a man now to be contented with the partial views which he enjoys of God will prepare him to be satisfied hereafter with the beatific vision through eternity. PSALM   XVIII

<!-- PAGE 152 -->
This Psalm consists of five unequal parts. In the first, David announces his desire to praise God for his wonderful deliverances, v. 2—4 (1—3.) In the second, these are described, not in historical form, but by the use of the strongest poetical figures, vs. 5—20 (4—19.) In the third, he declares them to have been acts of righteousness as well as mercy, and in strict accordance with the general laws of the divine administration, V8. 21—28 (20—27.) In the fourth, he goes again into particulars, but less in the way of recollection than of anticipation, founded both on what he has experienced and on what God has promised, vs. 29—46 (28—45.) In the fifth, this change of form is accounted for by summing up the promises referred to, and applying them not merely to David as an individual, but to 6* his posterity forever, thus including Christ and showing the whole composition to be one of those Messianic psalms, in which he is the principal subject of the prophecy, though not the only one nor even the one nearest to the eye of the observer, vs. 46— 51 (45—50.)

<!-- PAGE 153 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. By a Servant of Jehovah. By David, ivho spake unto Jehovah the words of this song, in the day Jehovah freed him from the hand of all his foes and from the hand of Saul. The first clause of the title shows, in this as in other cases, that the composition was designed from the beginning to be used in the public worship of the ancient church, and has reference therefore to the experience of the writer, not as a private person, but as an eminent servant of the Lord, i. e. one entrusted with the execution of his purposes, as an instrument or agent. The expressions, spake u?ito Jehovah &c. are borrowed from Ex. xv. 1 and Deut. xxxi. 30. This is the more observable because the psalm contains obvious allusions to the song of Moses in Deut. eh. xxxii. An analogous case is found in 2 Sam. xxiii. 1, where the form of expression is evidently borrowed from Num. xxiv. 3.—The repetition of hand is not found in the original, where the first word (tp) properly denotes the palm or inside of the hand, but is poetically used as an equivalent to T\ The hand is a common figure for power and possession. This whole clause bears a strong analogy to Ex. xviii. 10, where " out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharaoh" corresponds exactly to " out of the hand of all his foes and out of the hand of Saul," i. e. and especially of Saul. Compare " Judah and Jerusalem" Isaiah i. 1, "the land and Jericho" Josh. ii. 1. This form of expression does not imply that Saul was the last of his enemies, but rather that he Avas the first, both in time and in importance, so that he might be con sidered equal to all the others put together. And accordingly we find their idea carried out in the structure of this psalm, one PSALM   XVIil. i3i naif of which seems to relate esjecially to Saul and the remainder to his other enemies. The general expressions of this title show that the psalm was not occasioned by any particular event, but by a retrospect of all the deliverances from persecution which the witer had experienced.

<!-- PAGE 154 -->
2. And said, I will love thee, Jehovah, my strength ! The sentence is continued from the foregoing verse, who sa7ig unto the Lord . . . and said. The future form, I ivill love, represents it as a permanent affection, and expresses a fixed purpose. I not only love thee now, but am resolved to do so forever. The verb itself occurs nowhere else in its primitive form, but often in one of its derived forms, to express the compassionate regard of a superior to an inferior. The simple form is here used to denote the reciprocal affection of the inferior party. From its etymology the verb seems to express the strongest and most intimate attachment, being properly expressive of uxoqyT\ or parental love. The noun translated strength is also peculiar to this passage, though its root and cognate forms are very common. Combined with one of the divine names it constitutes the name Hezekiah, which may have been suggested by the verse before us. My strength, i. e. the giver of my strength or the supplier of its deficiencies, the substitute for my strength, my protector and deliverer.

3 (2.) Jehovah (is) my rock and my fortress and my deliverer; my God (is) my rock, I ivill trust in him; my shield and ?ny horn of salvation, my height (or high 2?lace.) By this accumulation of descriptive epithets the Psalmist represents God as the object of his trust and his protector. The first two figures, my rock and my fortress, contain an allusion to the physical structure of the Holy Land, as well as to David's personal experience. The caves and fissures of the rocks, with which  the land abounded, had often afforded him shelter and concealment when pursued by Saul. See Judges vi. 2. 1 Sam xxiv. 3. 2 Sam. v. 7. The -literal expression, my deliverer\ seems to be added as an explanation of the figures which pre /"•ede. My God may also be explained as one of the descriptive terms ; but it seems more natural to make it the subject of a new proposition, equivalent and parallel to that in the first clause. Here again we are obliged to use the same English word as a translation of two different words in Hebrew. As the rock (sbo) of the first clause suggests the idea of concealment and security, so the rock ("ns) of the second clause suggests that of strength and immobility. The figure is borrowed from Deut. xxxii. 4, and re-appears in Ps. xcii. 16 (15.) Compare Isaiah's phrase, a rock of ages (Isaiah xxvi. 4), and Jacob's phrase, the stone of Israel (Gen. xlix. 24), where stone, like rock in the clause before us, denotes not the place but the material, not a stone but stone, as one of the hardest and least mutable substances with which we are acquainted, and therefore an appropriate figure for combined immutability and strength. For the figurative use of shield in such connexions, see above on Ps. iii. 4 (3). The next phrase has allusion to the defensive habits of horned animals. The figure seems to be borrowed from Deut. xxxiii. 17. (Compare 1 Sam. ii. 10. Job xvi. 15.) My horn of salvation may be understood to mean, my horn, to wit, my salvation, so that the second noun is explanatory of the first. More probably however the expression means the horn that saves me, by repelling or destroying all my enemies. In Luke i. 69, the same phrase is applied to Christ by Zacharias. The last term in the description belongs to the same class with the first, and was probably suggested by the Psalmist's early wanderings among the rocks and caverns of Judea. The Hebrew word properly denotes a place so high as to be beyond the reach of danger. See above, on Ps. ix. 10 (9), where the same word is twice used ii: the same sense and figurative application.

<!-- PAGE 156 -->
4. (3) To be praised I will call Jehovah, and from my e?ie mies I shall be saved. * I will invoke God as a being worthy of all praise.' The first Hebrew word, which has the force of a future passive participle, is a standing epithet of Jehovah in the lyrical style of the Old Testament. See Ps. xlviii. 2 (1), xcvi. 4. cxiii. 3. cxlv. 3. 1 Chron. xvi. 25. The connexion of the clauses is, that the believing invocation of Jehovah in his true character and with a just appreciation of his excellence must needs be followed by the experience of his favor. They who cry and are not heard, as we read in v. 42 (41) below, cry indeed to Jehovah, but they do not invoke him as the one to be praised, they do not see him as he i§, and cannot pray to him as they ought. They ask and receive not because ti4ev ask amiss, (James iv. 3.)

5. (4) The bands of death have enclosed me, and the streams of worthlessness (or Belial) will (still) affright me. From the general acknowledgment contained in vs. 1—4, he proceeds to a more particular description of his danger. By bands we are probably to understand the cordage of a net, such as fowlers spread foi birds. This is a favorite metaphor with DaVid to denote dangers, and particularly those of an insidious and complicated kind. See below, Ps. cxvi. 3. The word Belial properly means ivorthless, good for r9thi?ig. The reference is here to wicked men, whose numbei and violence are indicated by the figure of torrents, overflowing streams. The use of the future in the last clause shows that the writer, as in many other cases, takes his position in the midst of the event, and views it as partly past and partly future. This bold assumption of an ideal situation greatly adds to the life and vividness of the description

6 (5.) The bands of hell surrounded ?ne, the snares of dea*k encountered me. This verse merely repeats and amplifies the first clause of the fifth.    Hell, in the wide old English sense  '•« a poetical equivalent to death. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) The explicit mention of snares in the last clause confirms the explanation before given of bands. Encountered, met me, crossed my path. The sense prevented or anticipated does not suit the context, and that of surprised is not sufficiently justified by usage.    See above, on Ps. xvii. 13.

<!-- PAGE 157 -->
7 (6.) In my distress I ivill invoke Jehovah and to my God will cry ; lie will hear from his palace ?ny voice, and my prayer before him ivill come, into his ears. The verbs are in the future because they express the feelings not of one looking back upon the danger as already past but of one actually implicated in it. See above, on v. 5. (4.) The literal meaning of the words is, in distress to me. Compare the phrase, at times in distress, Ps. ix. 10 (9), x. 1. My God implies a covenant relation and a hope of audience founded on it. The verb translated cry is specially appropriated to a cry for help. His palace here means heaven, as God's royal residence. See above, on Ps. xi. 4. Into his ears is a kind of afterthought, designed to strengthen the preceding expression. It shall not only reach his presence, but as it were shall penetrate his ears. The whole expresses an assured hope of being heard, and is really tantamount to an assertion that he was heard.

8 (7.) Then did the earth shake and quake and the foundations of the mountains trembled and were shaken because he was angry. The idea of succession expressed by the English then is conveyed in Hebrew by the form of the verb. The resemblance, in form and sound, of shake and quake, corresponds to that of the original verbs (c'?1Fn ©Mtfi). A reflexive or emphatic passive form of the first verb appears in the second clause. The closing words of this clause strictly mean because it was inflamed (or enkindled) to him, with an ellipsis of the noun (t|») anger.    The full construction maybe found in Deutvi. 15 and Ps. cxxiv. 3.    The phrase foundations of the mountains is copied from Deut. xxxii. 22.

<!-- PAGE 158 -->
9. There ivent up smoke in his wrath and fire from his mouth devours ; coals are kindled from it. Smoke and fire are mentioned as natural concomitants and parallel figures, both denoting anger and suggested by the phrase it ivas inflamed to him in the preceeding verse. Compare Deut. xxxii. 22. xxix. 19 (20). Ps. xxiv. 1. The translation nostrils rests on a confusion of two collateral derivatives from the verb to breathe. (See my note on Isai. xlviii. 9.) Nor is this sense required by the parallelism, unless mouth and nose must always go together. There seems to be some allusion to the fire and smoke at Sinai, Ex. xix. 18. From it may have reference to fire; but the nearest antecedent is his mouth. Compare Job xli. 11—13 (19 —21.) There is no need of supplying any object with devours ; the idea is that of a devouring fire, i. e. one capable of consuming whatever combustible material it may meet with.

10 (9.) So he bowed the heavens and came dozen, and gloom (was) under his feet. The scene seems here to be transferred from heaven to earth, where the Psalmist sees not only the divine operation but the personal presence of Jehovah. The word so, familiarly employed in English to continue a narrative, here represents the vau conversive of the Hebrew. The word translated gloom is not the usual term for darkness, but a poetical expression specially applied to dense clouds and vapours. The expression seems to be derived from Deut. v. 22. Compare with this clause Ex. xix. 16. and with the first Is. Ixiii. 19 (lxiv.  1.)

11 (10.) And he rode on a cherub and flew, and soared on the wings of a wind. The cherubim of the Mosaic system were visible representations of the whole class of creatures su perior to man. The singular form cherub seems to be used her to convey the indefinite idea of a superhuman but created being. The whole verse is a poetical description of God's intervention, as a scene presented to the senses. As earthly kings are car. ried by inferior animals, so the heavenly king is here described as borne through the air in his descent by beings intermediate between himself and man. The word soared in the second clause is used to represent a poetical term in the original borrowed from Deut. xxviii. 49. With the whole verse compare Ps. Ixviii. 18 (17) and civ. 3.

<!-- PAGE 159 -->
12 (11.) (And) set darkness (as) his covert about him, his shelter, darkness of'waters, clouds of the skies. This concealment suggests the idea of a brightness insupportable by mor. tal sight. Compare Deut. iv. 11. Job xxxvi. 29. Ps. xcvii. 2. Darkness of waters does not mean dark waters but watery darkness, a beautiful description of clouds charged with rain. The two nouns in the last clause both mean clouds, but the second is used only in the plural, and seems properly to designate the whole body of vapours constituting the visible heavens or sky.    A somewhat similar combination occurs in Ex. xix. 9.

13 (12.) From the blaze before him his clouds 'passed—hail and coals of fire. The dark clouds which enveloped him are now described as penetrated by the light within. Passed, i. e. passed away, were dispelled. The last clause may be construed as an exclamation such as an eye-witness might have uttered. The combination is borrowed from Ex. ix. 24. (Compare Ps. lxxviii. 47, 48.) Hail, as an instrument of the divine vengeance, is also mentioned in Jos. x. 11.

14 (13.) Then thundered in the heavens Jehovah, and the Highest gave his voice—hail and coals of fire. The second clause is a poetical repetition of the first.    ' The Most Hi^h gave his voice * means in this connexion neither more nor less than that he ■ thundered in the heavens.' Though visibly present upon earth he is described as still in heaven. Compare Gen. xi. 5, 7. xviii. 21. John iii. 13. The last clause may be construed as in v. 13, or made dependent on the verb gave, as in Ex. ix. 23 : "Jehovah gave thunder and hail." This clause is repeated because the hail and lightning were not merely terrific circumstances, but appointed instruments of vengeance and weapons of destruction.

<!-- PAGE 160 -->
15 (14.) Then sent lie his arrows and scattered them, and shot forth lightnings and confounded them. The lightnings of the last clause may be understood as explaining the arrows of the first. Instead of shot forth lightnings some translate and lightnings much, i. e. many, in which sense the Hebrew word ( 2*1 ) occurs sometimes elsewhere. (Ex. xix. 21. 1 Sam. xiv. 6. Num. xxvi. 54.) In several other places it seems to mean enough or too much. (Gen. xlv. 28. Ex. ix. 28. Num. xvi. 3, 7. Deut. i. 6.) If either of these constructions is adopted, ;he verb sent must be repeated from the other clause. The version first given, shot, is justified by the analogy of Gen. xlix. 23. The last verb in the sentence is a military term denoting .he  confusion of an army produced by a surprise or sudden janic. See Ex. xiv. 24. xxiii. 27. Jos. x. 10, and with the whole terse compare Ps. cxliv. 6.

16 (15.) Then were seen the channels of water and uncover' ed the foundations of the world, at thy rebuke, Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of thy wrath. The idea meant to be conveyed by this poetical description is that of sudden and complete subversion, the turning of the whole earth upside down. The language is not designed to be exactly expressive of any real physical change whatever. From or at thy rebuke, i. e. after it and in consequence of it.     The breath of thy wrath, thy angry breath, might also be rendered, the wind of thy wrath, thy angry or tempestuous wind. That the Hebrew words do not mean thy lose or nostrils, see above, on v. 9 (8.) Some suppose an allusion, in the rigures of this verse, to the floods of ivorthlessness in v. 5 (4), and the bands of hell in v. 6 (5.)

<!-- PAGE 161 -->
17 (16.) He ivill send from above, he will take me, he will draw me out of many waters. Here again the writer seems to take his stand between the inception and the consummation of the great deliverance and to speak just as he might have spoken while it was in progress. ' All this he has done in preparation, and now he is about to send &c.' This seems to be a more satisfactory explanation of the future forms than to make them simple presents, and still more than to make them preterites, which is wholly arbitrary and ungrammatical, although the acts described by these futures were in fact past at the time of composition. To send front above in our idiom means to send a messenger ; but in Hebrew this verb is the one used with hand where we say stretch out, e. g. in the parallel passage Ps. cxliv. 7. (See also Gen. viii. 9. xlviii. 14.) The noun however is sometimes omitted, and the verb used absolutely to express the sense of the whole phrase, as in 2 Sam. vi. 6. Ps. lvii. 4 (3.) From above, from on high, from the height or high place, i. e. heaven, the place of God's manifested presence. There is peculiar beauty in the word translated draw, which is the root of the name Moses, and occurs, besides the place before us, only in the explanation of that name recorded by himself, Ex. ii. 10. The choice of this unusual expression here involves an obvious allusion both to the historical fact and the typical meaning of the deliverance of Moses, and a kind of claim upon the part of David to be regarded as another Moses. B'

18(17.) He will free me from my enemy (because he is) ttrong, and from my haters, because they are mightier than PSALM   XVITl 139 /. The futures are to be explained as in the verse preceding. The enemy here mentioned is an ideal person, representing a whole class, of whom Saul was the chief representative. The idiomatic phrase, my enemy strong, may be understood as simply meaning my strong enemy ; but the true construction seems to be indicated by the parallelism. His own weakness and the power of his enemies is given as a reason for the divine interposition.

<!-- PAGE 162 -->
19 (18.) They will encounter me in the day of my calamity % and Jehovah has beejifor a stay to me. The first clause seems to express a belief that his trials from this quarter are not ended, while the other appeals to past deliverances as a ground of confidence that God will still sustain him. Most interpreters, however, make the future and preterite forms of this verse perfectly equivalent. ' They encountered me in the day of my calamity, and the Lord was for a stay to me.' As to the meaning of the first verb, see above, on v. 6 (5.) It is not improbable that David here alludes to his sufferings in early life when fleeing before Saul.    See above on v. 3 (2.)

20 (19.) And brought me out into the wide place; he will save me because he delights in me. The construction is continued from the foregoing sentence. As confinement or pressure is a common figure for distress, so relief from it is often represented as enlargement, or as coming forth into an open space. See above, on Ps. iv. 2 (1.) Here, as in the preceding verse, most interpreters make no distinction between preterite and future. The meaning may however be that he expects the same deliverance hereafter which he has experienced already.

21 (20.) Jehovah will treat me according to my righteous* ness; according to the cleanness of my hands will he repay me.    The future verbs have reference  to the condition of the X40 PSALM   XVIII. Psalmist under his afflictions, and the hopes which even then he was enabled to cherish. At the same time they make this the announcement of a general and perpetual truth, a law by which God's dispensations are to be controlled forever. The hands are mentioned as organs or instruments of action. Compare Isai. i» 15. Job ix. 30. xxii. 30. The righteousness here claimed is not an absolute perfection or entire exemption from all sinful infirmity, but what Paul calls submission to the righteousness of God (Pvom. x. 3), including faith in his mercy and a sincere governing desire to do his will. This is a higher and more comprehensive sense than innocence of some particular charge, or innocence in reference to man though not in reference to God.

<!-- PAGE 163 -->
22 (21.) For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, and have not apostatised from my God. The Lord's ways are the ways which he marks out for us to walk in, the ways of duty and of safety. To keep them is to keep one's self in them, to observe them so as to adhere to them and follow them. The last clause strictly means, I have not been wicked (or guilty) from my God ; a combination of the verb and preposition which shows clearly that the essential idea in the writer's mind was that of apostacy or total abjuration of God's service. It is of this mortal sin, and not of all particular transgressions, that the Psalmist here professes himself innocent.

23 (22.) For all Ids judgments (are) before me, and his statutes I will not put from me. Judicial decisions and permanent enactments are here used as equivalent expressions for all God's requisitions. To have these before one is to observe them, and the opposite of putting them away or out of sight. The terms of this profession have been evidently chosen in allusion to such dicta of the law itself as Deut. v. 29. xvii. 11. From the past tense of the foregoing verse he here insensibly slides into the present and the future, so as to make his profession of sinceritv include his former life, his actual dispositions, and his settled purpose for all time to come.

<!-- PAGE 164 -->
24 (23.) And I have been perfect with him, and have kept myself from my iniquity. He not only will be faithful, but he has been so already, in the sense before explained. There is evident reference in the first clause to the requisition of the Law, " thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God," Deut. xviii. 13 (Compare Gen. xvii. 1.) With means not merely in his presence, or his sight, as distinguished from men's estimate of moral objects, but ' in my intercourse and dealing with him.' Compare 1 Kings xi. 4. and the description of David in 1 Kings xiv. 8. xv. o. In the last clause some see an allusion to David's adventure in the cave, when his conscience smote him for meditating violence against Saul. See 1 Sam. xxiv..6., and compare I Sam. xxvi. 23. 24. But whether this be so or not, the clause undoubtedly contains a confession of corruption. My iniquity can only mean that to which I am naturally prone and subject. We have here then a further proof that the perfection claimed in the first clause is not an absolute immunity from sin, but an upright purpose and desire to serve God.

25 (24.) And Jehovah has requited one according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands before his eyes. This verse shows clearly that the futures in v. 21 (20) must be strictly understood. What he there represents himself as confidently hoping, he here professes to have really experienced. In the intervening verses he shows how he had done his part, and now acknowledges that God had faithfully performed his own.

26, 27 (25, 26.) With the gracious thou wilt show thyself gracious ; ivith the perfect man thou wilt show thyself perfect, with the purified thou wilt show thyself pure, and with the 142 PSALM   XV Hi. crooked thou wilt show thyself %)erverse. Wjiat he had pieviously mentioned as the method of God's dealings towards himself he now describes as a general law of the divine administration. The essential idea is that God is, in a certain sense, to men precisely what they are to him. The particular qualities specified are only given as examples, and might have been exchanged for others without altering the general sense. The form of expression is extremely strong and bold, but scarcely liable to misapprehension, even in v. 27 (26.) No one is in danger of imagining that God can act perversely even to the most perverse. But the same course of proceeding which would be perverse in itself or towards a righteous person, when pursued towards a sinner becomes a mere act of vindicatory justice. In the first clause of v. 26 (25) the ambiguous word gracious has been chosen to represent the similar term von for the comprehensive use of which see above, on Ps. iv. 4 (3). xii. 2(1). Perfect has the same sense as in v. 23, (22), namely, that of freedom from hypocrisy and malice. The verbs are all of the reflexive form and might be rendered, thou ivilt make thyself gracious, thou wilt act the gracious, or simply thou ivilt be gracious &c, but the common version approaches nearest to the force of the original expression. The first verb of v. 27 (26) occurs once elsewhere (Dan. xii. 10), the rest only here. The forms may have been coined for the occasion, to express the bold conceptions of the writer. The resemblance of the last clause of v. 27 (26) to Lev. xxvi. 23, 24, makes it highly probable that the whole form of this singular dictum was suggested by that passage, the rather as this Psalm abounds in allusions to the Pentateuch and imitations of it.

<!-- PAGE 165 -->
28 (27.) For thou ivilt save the afflicted people, and lofty eyes thou wilt brbig down. Another general description of God's dealings with mankind, repeated more than once in the New Testament.    See Matth. xxiii. 12. Luke xiv. 11. xviii. 14 High looks or lofty eyes is a common Old Testament expression for pride and haughtiness. See below, on Ps. ci. 5. «ro""»"i. 1 and compare Prov. xxi, 4. xxx. 13. Isai. x. 12. xxxvii. 23. Tne afflicted peojole means the people of God when in affliction, or considered as sufferers. Thou is emphatic : ' however men mav despise and maltreat thy afflicted people I know lY&Xihou wilt save them '

<!-- PAGE 166 -->
29 (28.) For thou wilt light my lamp ; Jehovah., my God, will illuminate my darkness. Having ascended from particulars to renerals he now reverses the process. On his own experience, as described in vs. 4—25 (3—24), he had founded a general declaration of God's mode of dealing with men, which statement he proceeds now to illustrate by recurring to his own experience. In this second part there is reason to beJVve that he has reference to the other cases of deliverance in his history, besides those from Saul's persecutions which had furnished the theme of his thanksgiving in the first part of the psalm. In accordance with this difference of subject, it has been observed that in this second part he appears more active, and not merely as an object but an instrument of God's delivering mercy. As to the form of expression in this part, it has been determined by the writer's assuming his position at the close of the Sauline persecution, and describing his subsequent deliverances as still prospective. This was the more convenient as he wished to express a confident assurance of God's goodness, not only to himself individually but to his posterity. A lamp or candle in the house is a common Hebrew figure for prosperity, and its extinction for distress. See Job xviii. 5. 6. xxi. 17. Prov. xxiv. 20. The first clause may also be translated, thou wilt ??ia/ce my light shine. The verb in the parallel clause is from another root, and there is consequently no such assonance as in the English version {light, enlighten^) The pronoun in the first clause is again emphatic. ' Whatever I may suffer at the hands of others, thou at least wilt light my candle.'    The emphasis is sustaine6 in the last clause by a sudden change of person and introduction of the divine rame.

<!-- PAGE 167 -->
30 (29.) For in thee I shall run (through or over) a troop, and in my God I shall leap a wall. From his ideal post of observation he foresees the military triumphs which awaited him, and which were actually past at the time of composition. The for, as in the two preceding verses, connects the illustration with the general proposition in vs. 27—29 (26—28.) 1 This is certainly God's mode of dealing,ybr I know that he will deal thus with me.' In thee, and in my God, i. e. in intimate union with him and possession of him, a much stronger sense than that of mere assistance (by thee), which however is included. See below, on Ps. xliv. 6 (5.)—The ellipsis of the preposition, with which the verbs are usually construed, belongs to the license of poetical style. Even in prose, however, we can say, to walk the streets, to,leap a wall. To run a troop may either mean to run against or through it; the phrase may therefore be completed so as to have either an offensive or defensive

mse. In like manner leaping a wall may either mean escaping from an enemy or storming his defences. Most interpreters prefer the stronger meaning of attack, which is certainly entitled to the preference, unless the writer be supposed to have selected his expressions with a view to the suggestion of both these ideas, which together comprehend all possible varieties o* success in war. As if he had said : ' Weak though I be in myself, I am sure that in conjunction with thee, neither armies nor fortifications shall be able to subdue or even to resist me.' With David's tone of triumphant confidence in this verse compare Paul's in 2 Cor. ii. 14. and Phil. iv. 13.

31 (30.)   The Almighty—perfect is his way—the worn or Jehovah is tried—a shield (is) he to all those trusting in him The first clause seems to be an amplification of my God in th« preceding verse. In my God, the Mighty {God), whose way is perfect, i. e. his mode of dealing, as before described, is free from all taint of injustice. This explanation suggests a further description of Jehovah as a sure protector His word here means especially his promise, perhaps with specific allusion to the seventh chapter of 2 Samuel. Tried, as metals are tried by fire, and thus proved to be genuine. See above, on Ps. xii. 7 (6.) A shield: see above, on Ps. iii. 4 (3.) Trusting in him: see above, on Ps. ii. 12.

<!-- PAGE 168 -->
32 (31.) For who is God save Jehovah ? And who is a rock besides our God ? The for shows that this verse gives the ground of the strong assurances contained in that before it. ' I affirm all this, because I recognise Jehovah as the only true God.' Hock has the same sense as in v. 3 (2.) The whole verse bears a stronsr resemblance to 2 Sam. vii. 22. o

33 (32.) The Almighty girding me with strength, and (who) has given (or rendered) my ivay perfect. The connexion of the verses is the same as that between vs. 31 (30) and 32 (31.) The our God of the preceding ^erse is here described as the Almighty girding me &c. For the true sense of the divine name here and in v. 32 (31), see above, on Ps. v. 5 (4.) vii. 12. (11.) x. 11. 12. xvi. 1. xvii. 6. The imparting of a quality or bestowing of a gift is in various languages described as clothing- Thus the English words endue and invest have almost lost their original meaning. The figure of girding is peculiarly significant because in the oriental dress the girdle is essential to all free and active motion. Compare Ps. Ixv. 13 (12), as translated In the margin of the English Bible, and Isai. xi. 5.—The last clause may either mean, ' who is faultless in the way by which he leads me,' i. e. whose dispensations towards me are free from all injustice ; or, ' who gives my conduct the perfection which belongs to it.'    The first construction gives the words the same sense as in v. 31 (30), but the other is by far the simplest and most natural, and as such entitled to the preference.

<!-- PAGE 169 -->
34 (33.) Making my feet like hinds, and on my heights he makes me stand. The first word properly means equalling, assimilating, the idea of resemblance being expressed in Hebrew both by the verb and by the particle of comparison. The female animal is supposed by some to be mentioned because it was regarded as more fleet, and accordingly we find it used in the Egyptian hieroglyphics as a symbol of swiftness. The name however may be used generally, as in English we apply either the masculine or feminine pronoun to some whole species. My heights, those which are to be mine by right of conquest and by Divine gift. The heights may be either the natural high lands of the country or the artificial heights of its fortified places. It has been disputed whether the swiftness mentioned in the first clause has reference to attack or flight. Most probably both were meant to be included, as in v. 30 (29) above. For both reasons swiftness of foot was prized in the heroic age, as appears from Homer's standing description of Achilles. See 2 Sam. ii. 18.  1 Chron. xii. 8.

35 (31.) Teaching my hands to war, and my arms have bent a bow of brass. The construction is continued from the preceding verse, all the participles having reference to the name of God in v. 33 (32.) The last clause is a strong expression for extraordinary strength, which is mentioned merely as a heroic quality. The translation broken rests on what is now regarded as a false etymology. Brass was used before iron in Egypt and other ancient countries as a material for arms.

3G (3o.) And hast given me a shield, thy salvatio?i, and thy right hand is to hold me up, and thy condescension is to make me grea*.    In the first clause we may also read the shield PSALM   Will. 147 of thy salvation, or thy shield of salvation, i e. thy saving shield, without material variation of the sense. The futures have reference to the point from which he is surveying things past as still future. The noun in the last clause means humility, as an attribute of human character (Prov. xv. 33), but when applied to God, benignant self-abasement, condescending kindness to inferiors.    Compare Ps. viii. 5 (4), Isai. lxvi. 1, 2.

<!-- PAGE 170 -->
37 (36.) Thou ivilt enlarge my steps under me, and my ankles shall not swerve. To enlarge the steps is to afford ample room for walking freely without hinderance. The opposite figure is that of confined steps. See Prov. iv. 12. Job xviii. 7. The meaning of the whole verse is :  thou wilt guide me safely.

38 (37.) I am to pursue my enemies and overtake them, and not to turn back until I destroy them. This is not a threat of vengeance, but a confident anticipation of perpetual triumphs, either in his own person or in that of his descendants. The form of expression in the first clause is borrowed from the Song of Moses, Ex. xv. 9. See above on Ps. vii. 6 (5), where the same two verbs are combined. The reference of all these future forms to past time would be not only gratuitous but ungrammatical.

39 (38.) I shall smite them a?id they cannot rise, they shall fall beneath my feet. This simply carries out the idea of successful pursuit in the preceding verse.

40 (39.) And thou hast girded me with strength for the war (or battle), thou wilt bow down my assailants under me. He returns to God as the author of his triumphs and successes. The first clause blends the ideas expressed in the corresponding clauses of vs. 33, 36 (32, 35.)—My assailants, literally, my insurgents, those rising up against me.    See v. 49 below, and M8 compare Ps. xliv. G (5), lix. 2 (1), Job xxvii. 7. Here again the spirit of the Psalmist is not that of an ambitious conqueror, Wt of a willing instrument in God's hand, to be used for the v.jomotion of his sovereign purpose.

<!-- PAGE 171 -->
41 (40.) And my enemies—thou hast given to me the back— ana my haters—I will destroy them. Each clause begins with an absolute nominative which might be rendered, as to my enemies, as to my haters. The remainder of the first clause is highly idiomatic in its form and scarcely admits of an exact translation. The word translated back properly means the back of the neck, but is frequently used in such connexions. The meaning of the whole phrase is, thou hast given me their back, i. e. made them to turn it towards me by putting them to flight. This is also a Mosaic form of speech. See Ex. xxiii. 27. and compare Josh vii. 8. 2 Chron. xxix. 6. Ps. xxi. 13 (12.)

42 (41.) They shall call (for help) and there is no deliverer —upon Jehovah, and he hears them not. Because they have no covenant relation to him, as the Psalmist had. Their calling on Jehovah does not exclude all reference to heathen foes, as appears from Jon. i. 14.—Hear, in the pregnant sense of hearing favourably, granting, answ ering a prayer. See above, on Ps. iii. 5 (4).

43 (42.) And I shall beat them small as dust before the wi?id, as dirt in the streets I will pour them out. The comparisons in this verse are intended to express the Psalmist's superiority to his enemies, his consequent contempt for them, and the facility with which he will destroy them. Similar images are not unfrequent in the Old Testament. See for example Isai. x. G. Zeph. i. 17. Zech. x. 5.

44 (43).   Thou wilt save me from the  strifes of the people * PSALM   XVT1I. 149 thou wilt place me at the head {pi for a chief) of nations; a people I have not known shall serve me. He was not only to be freed from the internal strifes of his own people, but by that deliverance enabled to subdue other nations. The closing word? of the Psalm, and its obvious connexion with the promises in 2 Sam. vii, show that this anticipation was not limited to David's personal triumphs, either at home or abroad, but meant to comprehend the victories of his successors, and especially of him in whom the royal line was at once to end and be perpetuated. It may, therefore, be affirmed with truth that this prediction had its complete fulfilment only in Christ.

<!-- PAGE 172 -->
45, 46 (44, 45.) At the hearing of the ear they will obey me, ' the so7is of outland will lie to me ; the sons of outland will decay, and tremble out of their e?iclosures. The meaning of the first words of this verse is clear from Job xlii. 5. where the hearing of the ear is put in opposition to the sight of the eye, report or hearsay to personal and ocular inspection. The verb translated will obey, whenever it occurs elsewhere, is a simple • passive of the verb to hear, and accordingly some render it here, they who have only been heard of by the hearing of the ear, i. e. those whom I have only heard of but have never seen will feign obedience. But as the corresponding form of the verb to lie (y£r\^\ is used by Moses actively, in Deut. xxxiii. 29. to which place there is obvious allusion here, the first translation above given is entitled to the preference, and the sense is, that as soon as foreign nations hear of him, they will lie to him, i. e. yield a feigned obedience through the influence of fear, in which sense another form of the same verb is used, not only in the passage of the Pentateuch just cited, but in Ps. lxvi. 3. lxxxi. 16 (15).—The old word outland, which may still be traced in its derivative adjective outlandish, has been here employed to represent a Hebrew word for which we have no equivalent in modern English, and which means foreign parts indefinitely or collectively.   The marginal version in the English Bible (sons of the stranger) is only an inexact approximation to the form of the original. The verb decay which properly denotes the withering of plants (see above, Ps. i. 3), is applied to the wasting of the human subject, and indeed of whole communities, in Ex. xviii. 18. To tremble from or out of is a pregnant phrase, involving the idea of a verb of motion, and meaning to come forth vrith fear. The same form of expression may be found in Micah vii. 17, and analogous ones in 1 Sam. xvi. 4. Hosea xi. 11.— Their enclosures, their retreats or refuges, perhaps with special reference to military enclosures, such as fortresses and camps.

<!-- PAGE 173 -->
47 (4C.) Jehovah lives, and blessed be my rock, and high shall be the God of my salvation. The first phrase, (nil*!*1 ^n) which is elsewhere always used as a formula of swearing {as the Lord liveth, i. e. as certainly as God exists), is by some interpreters confounded with a kindred phrase (^bran ^rp), vive le roi, (long) live the Icing, and regarded as a kind of acclamation, similar to those which were uttered at the coronation of the Jewish kings (1 Sam. x. 24. 1 Kings i. 25, 39. 2 Kings xi. 12.) But besides the difference of form in Hebrew, such a wish is inappropriate to any but a mortal. There may, however, be an intentional allusion to the custom in question, as well as to the practice of swearing by the life of Jehovah, both of which would naturally be suggested to a Hebrew reader. Jehovah is described as the living God, in contrast to dead idols, or imaginary deities, which as Paul says (1 Cor. viii. 4) are nothing in the world. Blessed be my rock, the foundation of my hope, my refuge and protector. See above, on v. 3 (2.) The word translated blessed does not mean happy, but praised, and may here have the peculiar sense of worthy to be j) raised, like bbnfa in v 4 (3) above. It may then be rendered as an affirmation : my rock (s) worthy to be praised. Or it may be taken as a wish : lYa/   d (be) my rock, to which there is the less objection as the PSALM  XV1IT. X51 preceding proposition is, in fact though not in form, a doxology. i. e. a declaration of what God is in himself, and of that to which he is in consequence entitled. The third phrase, he shall he high, may be understood to mean, not only he shall still be glorious, but he shall be magnified as such, exalted by the praises of his creatures. The God of my salvation, or, my God of salvation, does not merely mean the God who saves me, but my God who is a Saviour, of whom this is one essential character. Compare Luke i. 47. This epithet is common in the Psalms, and occurs once or twice in the Prophets. (Isai. xvii. 10. Mic vii. 7. Hab. hi. 18.)

<!-- PAGE 174 -->
48 (47.) The Mighty (God) ivho gives revenges to me and has subdued nations under me. The construction is the same as in vs. 31, 33 (30, 32) above. This verse contains a further description of the God of his salvation, and at the same time justifies the affirmations of the preceding verse. What the Psalmist here rejoices in is not vengeance wreaked upon hij personal enemies, but punishment inflicted on the enemies of God through himself as a mere instrument. Not to rejoice in this would have proved him unworthy of his high vocation. With the last clause compare Ps. xlvii. 4 (3.) cxliv. 2.

49 (48.) Saving me from my enemies ; yea, from my as sailants (or insurgents) thou ivilt raise me high ; from the man of violence thou wilt deliver me. Here again the construction changes from the participle to the finite verb, but with a further change to the second person, which adds greatly to the life and energy of the expression. The yea may be taken as a simple copulative, and assailants as a mere equivalent to enemies. Some prefer however to assume a climax, and to understand the verse as meaning that he had not only been delivered from external foes but from the more dangerous assaults of domestic treason or rebellion.    There would then seem to be an allusion to Absalom's conspiracy. Thou wilt raise me% sec me up on high, beyond the reach of all my enemies. For a similar expression, see below, Ps. lix. 2 (1), as translated in the margin of the English Bible. The man of violence has no doubt reference to Saul, but only as the type of a whole class, Compare Ps. cxl. 2, 5 (1, 4.)

<!-- PAGE 175 -->
50 (49.) Therefore 1 ivill thank thee among the nations, oh Jehovah, and to thy name ivill sing. The first word has reference not merely to the fact of his deliverance and promotion, but to the character in which he had experienced these blessings, and the extent of the divine purpose in bestowing them. • Therefore—because it is God who has done and is to do all this for me, and because it is in execution of a purpose comprehending the whole race^—I will not confine my praises and thanksgiving to my own people, but extend them to all nations.' The performance of this vow has been going on for ages and is still in progress wherever this and other psalms of David are now sung or read. The verse before us is legitimately used bj Paul, together with Deut. xxxii. 43. Isai. xi. 1, 10, and Ps. cxvii. 1. to prove that, even under the restrictive institutions of the old economy, God was not the God of the Jews only but of the Gentiles also. (Horn. iii. 29. xv. 9—12.)—The verb in the first clause strictly means I will confess or acknowledge, but is specially applied to the acknowledgment of gifts received or benefits experienced, and then corresponds almost exactly to our thank. Tiie corresponding verb in the last clause means to praise by music.    See above, on Ps. vii. 18 (17), ix. 3, 12 (2, 11.)

51 (-30.) Making great the salvations of Ids King and doing kindness to his Anointed, to David and to his seed unto eternity. We have here another instance of the favourite construction which connects a sentence with the foregoing context by means of a participle agreeing with the subject of a previous sentence. See above, vs. 31 (30), 32 (31), 33 (32), 34 (33), 49 (48). Making great salvations, saving often and signally. The plural form conveys the idea of fulness and completeness. As the phrase His Anointed might have seemed to designate David exclusively, he shows its comprehensive import by expressly adding David and his seed, from which it clearly follows that the Messiah or Anointed One here mentioned is a a complex or ideal person, and that Jesus Christ, far from being excluded, is in fact the principal person comprehended, as the last and greatest of the royal line of David, to whom the promises were especially given, in whom alone they are completely verified, and of whom alone the last words of this Psalm could be uttered, in their true and strongest sense, without a falsehood or without absurdity. In this conclusion, as in other portions of the Psalm, there is a clear though tacit reference to the promise in 2 Sam. vii. 12—16, 25, 26, where several of the very same expressions are employed. Compare also Ps. xxviii. 8. lxxxiv. 10 (9). and Ps. lxxxix. passim.

<!-- PAGE 176 -->
Another copy of this Psalm is found recorded near the clost* of David's history (2 Sam. ch. xxii.), which confirms the intimation in the title, that it was not composed in reference to any particular occasion, but in a general retrospection of the mercies of his whole life. The two texts often differ, both in form and substance, which has led some to suppose, that one is an erroneous transcript of the other. But this conclusion is forbidden by the uniform consistency of each considered in itself, as well as by the obvious indications of design in the particular variations, which may be best explained by supposing, that David himself, for reasons not recorded, prepared a twofold form of this sublime composition, which is the less improbable as there are other unambiguous traces of the same process in the Old Testament, and in the writings of David himself. See below, the exposition of Ps. liii, and compare that of Isaiah, ch. xxxvi—xxxix. If this be a correct hypothesis, the two forms of the eighteenth psalm may be treated as distinct and independent compositions, and it has therefore been thought most advisable, both for the purpose of saving room and of avoiding the confusion which a parallel interpretation might have caused, to confine the exposition in this volume to that form of the psalm, which was preserved in the Psalter for permanent use in public worship, and which exhibits strong internal proofs of being the original or first conception, although both are equally authentic and inspired.
