<!-- psalm 2 | vol 1 | scan pages 30-33 -->

<!-- PAGE 30 -->
way perish only brings out in more prominent relief the truth really asserted, namely, the perdition of those who travel it. This completes the contrast, and sums up the description of the truly Happy Man, as one whose delight is in the law and his happiness in the favour of Jehovah, and whose strongest negative characteristic is his total want of moral likeness here to those from whom he is to dwell apart hereafter. PSALM   II.

A sublime vision of the nations in revolt against Jehovah and his Anointed, with a declaration of the divine purpose to maintain his King's authority, and a warning to the world that it must bow to him or perish. The structure of this psalm is extremely regular. It naturally falls into four stanzas of three verses each. In the first, the conduct of the rebellious nations is described. In the second, God replies to them by word and deed. In the third, the Messiah or Anointed One declares the divine decree in relation to himself. In the fourth, the Psalmist exhorts the rulers of the nations to submission, with a threatening of divine wrath to the disobedient, and a closing benediction on believers. The several sentences are also very regular in form, exhibiting parallelisms of great uniformity. Little as this psalm may, at first sight, seem to resemble that before it, there is really a very strong affinity between them. Even in form they are related to each other. The number of verses and of stanzas is just double in the second, which moreover begins, as the first ends, with a threatening, and ends, as iba S PSALM  II. first begins, with a beatitude. There is also a resemblance in their subject and contents. The contrast indicated in the first is carried out and rendered more distinct in the second. The first is in fact an introduction to the second, and the second to what follows. And as the psalms which follow bear the name of David, there is the strongest reason to believe that these two are his likewise, a conclusion confirmed by the authority of Acts iv. 25, as well as by the internal character of the psalm itself. The imagery of the scene presented is evidently borrowed from the warlike and eventful times of David. He cannot, however, be himself the subject of the composition, the terms of which are wholly inappropriate to any king but the Messiah, to whom they are applied by the oldest Jewish writers, and again and again in the New Testament. This is the first of those prophetic psalms, in which the promise made to David, with respect to the Messiah (2 Sam. vii. 16. 1 Chr. xvii. 11—14), is wrought into the lyrical devotions of the ancient church. The supposition of a double reference to David, or some one of his successors, and to Christ, is not only needless and gratuitous, but hurtful to the sense by the confusion which it introduces, and forbidden by the utter inappropriateness of some of the expressions used to any lower subject. The style of this psalm, although not less pure and simple, is livelier than that of the first, a difference arising partly from the nature of the subject, but still more from the dramatic structure of the composition.

<!-- PAGE 31 -->
1. This psalm opens, like the first, with an exclamation, here expressive of astonishment, and indignation at the wickedness and folly of the scene presented to the psalmist's view. TV/it/ do nations make a noise, tumultuate, or rage? The Hebrew verb is not expressive of an internal feeling, but of the outward agitation which denotes it. There may be an allusion 1o the roiling and roaring of the sea, often used as an emblem of popular commotion, both in the Scriptures and the classics     The PSALM   II. o past tense of this verb (why have they raged ?) refers to the commotion as already begun, while the future in the next clause expresses its continuance. A?id peoples, not people in the collective sense of persons, but in the proper plural sense of nations, races, loill imagine, i. e. are imagining and will continue to imagine, vanity, a vain thing, something hopeless and impossible. The interrogation in this verse implies that no rational solution of the strange sight could be given, for reasons assigned in the remainder of the psalm. This implied charge of irrationality is equally well founded in all cases where the same kind of opposition exists, though secretly and on the smallest scale.

<!-- PAGE 32 -->
2. The confused scene presented in the first verse now be comes more distinct by a nearer view of the contending parties. [Why will) the kings of earth set themselves, or, without repeating the interrogation, the kings of earth will set themselves, or take their stand, and rulers consult together, literally sit together, but with special reference to taking counsel, as in Ps. xxxi. 14 (13), against Jehovah and against his Anointed, or Messiah, which is only a modified form of the Hebrew word here used, as Christ is a like modification of the corresponding term in Greek. External unction or anointing is a sign, in the Old Testament, of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and especially of those conferred on prophets, priests, and kings, as ministers of the theocracy, and representatives of Christ himself. To kings particularly, as the highest and most comprehensive order, and peculiar types of Christ in his supremacy as Head of the Church, the sacred history applies the title of the Lord's Anointed. The rite of unction is explicitly recorded in the case of Saul, David, and Salomon, and was probably repeated at the coronation of their successors. From the verse before us, and from Dan. ix. 26, the name Messiah had, before the Advent,

come into use among the Jews as a common designation of the 1# 10 PSALM   IT. great Deliverer and King whom they expected. (Compare John i. 41 with v. 49 of the same chapter, and with Mane xv. 32.) The intimate relation of the Anointed One to God himself is indicated even here by making them the common object of attack or rather of revolt. In Acts iv. 25—27, this description is applied to the combination of Herod and Pilate, Jews and Gentiles, against Jesus Christ, not as the sole event predicted, but as that in which the gradual fulfilment reached its culmination. From that quotation, and indeed from the terms of the prophecy itself, we learn that nations here does not mean gentiles or heathen as opposed to jews, but whole communities or masses of mankind, as distinguished from mere personal or insulated cases of resistance and rebellion.

<!-- PAGE 33 -->
3. Having described the conduct of the disaffected nations and their chiefs, he now introduces them as speaking. In the preceding verse, they were seen, as it were, at a distance, taking counsel. Here they are brought so near to us, or we to them, that we can overhear their consultations. Let its break their bands, i. e. the bands of the Lord and his Anointed, the restraints imposed by their authority. The form of the Hebrew verb   may be   expressive either   of  a   proposition  or

[of a fixed determination. We will break their bands, we are resolved to do it. This is in fact involved in the other version, where let us break must not be understood as a faint or dubi-

\ ous suggestion, but as a summons to the execution of a formed and settled purpose. The same idea is expressed, with a slight modification, in the other clause. And we will cast, or let us cast away from us their cords, twisted ropes, a stronger term than bands. The verb, too, while it really implies the act of breaking, suggests the additional idea of contemptuous facility, as if fhey had said, let us fling away from us with scorn these feeble bands by which we have been hitherto confined. The application of this passage to the revolt of the Ammonites and
