<!-- psalm 20 | vol 1 | scan pages 186-187 -->

<!-- PAGE 186 -->
PSALM    XX.

A prayer for the use of the ancient church in time of war. Addressing her visible head, she wishes him divine assistance and success, vs. 2—6 (1—5), and expresses a strong confidence that God will answer her petition, vs. 7—9 (6—8), which she then repeats aud sums up in conclusion, v. 10 (9).

There is no trace of this psalm having been composed with reference to any particular occasion, its contents being perfectly appropriate to every case in which the chosen people, under their theocratic head, engaged in war against the enemies of God and Israel.

1. To the -Chief Musician. Y^ritten for his use and entrusted to him for execution. As in all other cases, this inscription shows the psa]m to have been written, not for the expression of mere personal feelings, but to be a vehicle of pious sentiment to the collective body of God's people.—A Psalm by David. The correctness of this statement is not only free from any positive objection, but confirmed by the whole tone and style of the performance, as well as by its intimate connexion with the next psalm.    See below, on Ps. xxi. 1.

2 (1.) Jehovah hear thee in the day of trouble ! The name of Jacob's God exalt thee! The name of God, the revelation of his nature in his acts. ' May those divine attributes, which have been so often manifested in the experience of the chosen people, be exercised for thy protection. See above, on Ps. v 12 (11.)—The God of Jacob, of the patriarch so called, and of his seed. See Matt. xxii. 32.—Exalt thee, raise thee beyond the reach of danger. See above, on Ps. ix. 10 (9.) xviii. 3, 49 (2, 48.)

<!-- PAGE 187 -->
3 (2.) {May Jehovah) send thee help from (his) sanctuary, and from Zion sustain thee. The mention of Zion and the sanctuary shows that Jehovah is appealed to as the king of his people, and as such not only able but bound by covenant to afford them aid. See below, on v. 10 (9.) Sustai?i thee, hold thee up, the same verb that is used in Ps. xviii. 36 (35.) Both verbs may also be translated as simple futures, ivill send, will sustain ; but see below.

4 (3.) {May Jehovah) remember all thy gifts and accept thy offering. Selah. The word remember in the first clause seems to involve an allusion to the memorial (mztis;) a name given in the sacrificial ritual to that part of the vegetable offering which was burnt upon the altar. See Lev. ii. 2. vi. 8 (15).—The word translated gifts, although properly generic, is specifically used to denote the vegetable offerings of the law. while the word translated offering is the technical name of the principal animal sacrifice. They are put together to describe these two species of oblation. Compare Ps. xl. 7. (6.) Jer. xvii. 26. Dan. ix. 27.—The verb translated accept means elsewhere to make fat (Ps. xxiii. 5), or to remove the ashes of the altar. (Ex. xxvii. 3. Num. iv. 13.) Some give it here the sense of turning into ashes or consuming, others that of pronouncing fat and therefore fit for sacrifice. In either case acceptance is implied. The optative form of the verb in the original seems to confirm the sense already put upon the foregoing futures. From this verse it has been inferred, with some probability, that the whole psalm was specially intended to be used at the sacrifice offered by the Israelites before a campaign
