<!-- psalm 21 | vol 1 | scan pages 188-193 -->

<!-- PAGE 188 -->
M a battle. (See 1 Sam. xiii. 9, 10.) To this some add the supposition, that the selah, in the verse before us, marks the pause in the performance of the psalm, during which the sacrifice was actually offered.    See above, on Ps. hi. 3 (2).

5 (4.) [May lie) give thee according to thy heart, and all thy counsel (or design) fulfil. This is not a vague wish for success m general, but a prayer for success on the particular occasion when the psalm was to be used.— Thy heart, thy desire. Thy counsel, the plan which thou hast formed and undertaken to execute in God's name and for the protection or deliverance of his people.

6 (5.) May we rejoice in thy deliverance, and in the name of our God display a banner! May Jehovah fulfil all thy petitio?is ! The phrase thy deliverance may mean that wrought or that experienced by thee. In all probability both ideas are included. In the name of our God, and therefore not as a mere secular triumph! The second verb (3315) seems to be connected with a noun (bin) used by Moses to denote the banners under which the four great divisions of the host marched through the wilderness (Num. i. 52. ii. 2, 3, 10, 18, 25. x. 14.) Hence the conjectural translation, ' may we set up (or display) a banner/ But as the participle of the same verb seems, in the only other place where it occurs (Song of Sol. v. 10), to signify distinguished or exalted, others follow the Septuagint and Vulgate* in translating, may ice be lifted up or magnified.—The last clause is a comprehensive prayer, equivalent in meaning to v. 5 (4) above, and including not merely what had been expressly specified, but all that the theocratic sovereign might desire or attempt in conformity with God's will, whether known to the whole body of his followers or not. This clause concludes the first division of the psalm by recurring to the theme with which 166 PSALM  XA. it opens, and with which again the whole psalm closes.    See below, on v. 10 (9.)

<!-- PAGE 189 -->
7 (6.) Noiv I know that Jehovah has saved his Anointed— he will hear him from his holy heavens—-with the saving strength of his right hand. What was asked in the foregoing context is here said to be already granted. Hence some imagine that a battle or other decisive event must be supposed to intervene. But this, besides being highly improbable and forced in so brief a composition, is forbidden by the immediate recurrence to the future form, lie will hear. A far more natural solution is, that this verse expresses a sudden conviction or assurance that the preceding prayers are to be answered. As if he had said : ' such are my requests, and I know that Jehovah has already granted them, so that in his purpose and to the eye of faith, his Anointed is already safe and has already triumphed.' The change to the first person singular does not indicate a different speaker, but merely puts what follows into the mouth of each individual believer or of the whole body viewed as an ideal person.

The second member of the sentence may be best explained as a parenthesis, leaving the third to be construed directly with the first, as in the version above given.—In this verse we have two examples of a common Hebrew idiom, one of them a very strong one. The phrase translatedyVcwz. his holy heavens might seem tcmean the heavens of his holiness ; but the true construction is his heavens of holiness, i. e. the heavens where the Holy One resides, and from which his assistance must proceed. See above, on Ps. ii. 6. xi. 4. The attribute of holiness is mentioned to exalt still fuither the divine and sacred nature of the warfare and the victory to which the psalm relates. Another example of the Hebrew idiom before referred to is the saving strength of his right hand, which literally rendered is the strengths of the salvation of his right hand.    The  plural strengzlis may PSALM XX. l(j* either be intensive or refer to various exertions of the power here described. The right hand has the same sense as in Ps. xviii. 36 (35.) Here, as in Ps. xviii. 51 (50), His Messiah or Anointed One includes the whole succession of genuine theocratic kings, not excepting Him whose representatives they were, and in whom the royal line was at the same time closed and made perpetual.

<!-- PAGE 190 -->
8 (7.) These in chariots and these in horses, and we in the name of Jehovah our God, will glory. All the objects are connected by the same preposition with the same verb, namely, that at the end of the sentence. In order to retain the preposition, which must otherwise be varied and thereby obscure the structure of the sentence, the verb glory, which is construed with the preposition in, has been substituted for the strict sense of the verb, we will cause to be remembered, i. e. mention or commemorate. See Ex. xxiii. 13. Amos vi. 10. Isai. xlviii. 1. lxiii. 7. The insertion of the verb trust, in the English versions of the first clause, is entirely gratuitous. These and these is the Hebrew idiom for some and others. Compare this to this, in Ex. xiv. 20. Isai. vi. 3.—The verb, in the case before us, may have been selected in allusion to the cognate form in v. 4 (3) above. 1 As God has remembered thy offerings, so we will cause his name to be remembered ?'—Our God is again emphatic and significant, as showing that the whole psalm has reference to the covenant relation between God and his people represented by their theocratic sovereign. With the contrast in this verse compare 1 Sam. xvii. 45. Isai. xxxi. 3. Ps. xxxiii. 16, 17.

9 (8.) They have bowed and fallen, and ive have risen and stood upright. Here, as in v. 7 (6), the past tense expresses the certainty of the event, or rather the confidence with which it is expected. The emphatic they at the beginning means the? enemies and oppressors of God's people.    We have arisen seema to imply a previous prostration and subjection.—The last verb occurs only here in this form, which is properly reflexive, and may be explained to mean, we have straightened ourselves up

<!-- PAGE 191 -->
10 (9.) Jehovah save ! Let the king hear us in the day w* call, or still more closely, in the day of our calling. The Septuagint and Vulgate make the king a part of the first clause : ' Jehovah save the king,' (Domine salvumfac rege??i.) But this not only violates the masoretic accents, which, though not ultimately binding, are entitled to respect as a traditional authority, but separates the verb in the last clause from its subject, so that both the ancient versions just referred to have been under the necessity of changing the third into the second person (hear us) The first clause is besides more expressive and emphatic without the king than with it. Nothing could be more pregnant or sonorous than the laconic prayer, Jehovah save! The object is of course to be supplied from v. 7 (6), and from the tenor of the whole psalm. The other construction, it is true, enables us to make the King of this verse the same person with the Anointed of v. 7 (6.) But far from any disadvantage, there is great force and beauty, in referring the expected blessing to the true king of Israel, whom David and his followers only represented. See Deut. xxxiii. 5. Ps. xlviii. 3 (2.) Matt. v. 35.— By taking the last verb as a future proper (the king will hear us) the psalm may be made to close with a promise or rather with a confident anticipation of God's blessing. Most interpreters, however, prefer to make it optative, and thus to let the psalm conclude as it began with an expression of intense desire PSALM   XXI ]69 PSALM   XXI.

<!-- PAGE 192 -->
As in the eighteenth psalm David publicly thanks God for the promises contained in 2 Samuel vii, so here he puts a similar thanksgiving into the mouth of the church or chosen people. In vs. 2—7 (i—6), the address is to Jehovah, and the king i* spoken of in the third person. In v. 8 (7), this form of speect is used in reference to both. In vs. 9—13 (8—12), the address is to the king. In v. 14 (13) it returns to Jehovah. As to the substance or contents of these successive parts, the first praises God for what he has bestowed upon the king, vs. 2—7 (1- 6.) In the second, there is a transition to another theme, v. 8 (7.) The third congratulates the king on what he is to do and to enioy through the divine mercy, vs. 9—13 (8—12.) Th« fourth returns to the point from which the whole set out, v. 14 (13.) The opinion that this psalm relates to the fulfilment of the prayer in that before it, seems to be inconsistent with its structure and contents as just described. They are rather par ailel than consecutive, the principal difference being this, that while the twentieth psalm relates to the specific case of assist ance and success in war, the twenty-first has reference to the whole circle of divine gifts bestowed upon the Lord's Anointed

1. To the Chief Musician.    A Psalm, by David.    The coi rectness of the first inscription is apparent from the structure cl the psalm, throughout which the speaker is the ancient church The correctness of the other may be argued from the genera* 170 PSALM   XXT. resemblance of the style to that of the Davidic psalms, from nu merous coincidences of expression with the same, and from the tone of lively hope which seems to indicate the recent date of the divine communication, especially when compared with psalms which otherwise resemble it, such as the eighty-ninth. The particular resemblance between this psalm and the twentieth makes them mutually testify to one another's genuinenesa and authenticity.

<!-- PAGE 193 -->
2(1.) Jehovah, in thy strength shall the king rejoice, and in thy salvation how shall he exult! This verse commences the description of God's favour to the king with a general statement, afterwards amplified in vs. 3—7 (2—6.) Thy strength, as imparted to him, or as exercised in his deliverance, which last agrees best with the parallel expression, thy salvation, i. e. thy deliverance of him from the evils which he felt or feared. In thy strength and salvation, i. e. in the contemplation and experience of it. The future verbs show that the gift has not yet been consummated, without excluding the idea of it as begun already.

3 (2.) The desire of his heart thou hast given unto him, and the quest of his lips hast not withholden. Selah. The occasion of the joy and exultation mentioned in the preceding verse is now more particularly set forth. It is easy to imagine, although not recorded, that the great promise in the seventh chapter of 2 Samuel was in answer to the fervent and long continued prayers of David for a succession in his own family.— The word translated quest occurs only here, but its sense is determined by the parallelism and the Arabic analogy. The combination of the positive and negative expressions of the same idea [given and not withholden) is a favourite Hebrew idiom.

4 (3.)   For thou  wilt come before him with blessings of
