<!-- psalm 22 | vol 1 | scan pages 194-197 -->

<!-- PAGE 194 -->
goodness, thou wilt set upon his head a crow?i of gold. This, as Luther observes, is an answer to the question what he had desired. The for connects it with the statement in the foregoing verse which is here explained and justified. As the preterites in v. 3 (2) show that his request was granted in the divine purpose, so the futures here show how it was to be fulfilled in fact. Come before, come to meet in a friendly manner. See above, on Ps. xvii. 13. xviii. 6 (5), and compare Deut. xxiii.5 (4.) —Blessings of good, not blessings prompted by the divine goodness, but conferring, or consisting in, good fortune, happiness. See above, on Ps. xvi. 2.—The reference in the last clause is not to David's literal coronation at the beginning of his reign, nor to the golden crown which he took from the Ammonitish king of Itabbah (2 Sam. xii. 30), but to his ideal coronation by the granting of these glorious favors to himself and his successors. The divine communication in the seventh of 2d Samuel seems to be here viewed, as the only real coronation of David as a theocratic sovereign. The last word in the sentence is the same that was translated pure gold when contrasted with the ordinary word for gold, Ps. xix. 11 (10.)

5 (4.) Life he asked of thee, thou hast given (it) to him, length of days, perpetuity and eternity. By disregarding the masoretic interpunction, the construction may be simplified without a change of sense. ' Life he asked of thee, thou hast given him length of days,' &c. The last words of the verse are often used adverbially to mean for ever and ever; but as they are both nouns, it is best to put them here in apposition with the same part of speech which immediately precedes. This last clause shows that the life which David prayed for was not personal longevity, but the indefinite continuation of his race, an honour which was granted to him, even beyond his hopes and wishes, in the person of our Saviour. Compare 2 Sam. vii. 13, 16.    Ps. lxxxix. 5 (4.) cxxxii. 12.

<!-- PAGE 195 -->
6 (5.) Great shall be his majesty in thy salvation; glory and honour thou ivilt put upon 1dm. His personal experience of God's saving grace, and his connexion with the great scheme of salvation for mankind, would raise him to a dignity far beyond that of any oiher monarch, and completely justifying even the most exalted terms used in Scripture, from the charge of adulation or extravagance.

7 (6.) For thou ivilt make him a blessing to eternity; thou icilt gladden him with joy by thy countenance (or presence^) He shall not only be blessed himself, but a blessing to others, the idea and expression being both derived from the promise to Abraham in Gen. xii. 2, an allusion which serves also to connect the Davidic with the Abrahamic covenant, and thus to preserve unbroken the great chain of Messianic prophecies. Make him a blessing, literally, place him for (or constitute him) blessing. The plural form suggests variety and fullness, as in Ps. xviii. 51 (50). xx. 7 (6.) By thy countenance, or with thy face, i. e., by looking on him graciously, not merely in thy presence or before thee, as the place of the enjoyment, but by the sight of thee, as its cause or source. See above, on Ps xvi. 11.

8 (7.) For the king (is) trusting in Jehovah, and in the grace of the Most High he shall not be moved. The consummation of this glorious promise was indeed far distant, but to the eye of faith distinctly visible. In the grace seems to mean something more than through the grace (ox f avow) of the Most High, as the ground of his assurance, or the source of his security. The words appear to qualify the verb itself, and to denote that he shall not be shaken from his present standing in God's favour. The use of the third person, in this verse, with reference both to God and the king, makes it a kind of connectfrig link between the direct address to God in the first part of the Psalm, and the direct address to the king in the second.

<!-- PAGE 196 -->
9 (8.) Thy hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find (those) hating thee. Having shown what God would do for his Anointed, the Psalm now describes what the latter shall accomplish through Divine assistance. Corresponding to this variation in the subject, is that in the object of address, which has been already noticed. By a kind of climax in the form of expression, hand is followed by right hand, a still more emphatic sign of active strength. To find, in this connexion, includes the ideas of detecting and reaching. Compare 1 Sam. xxiii. 17. Isai. x. 10 ; in the latter of which places the verb is construed with a preposition (^), as it is in the first clause of the verse before us, whereas in the other clause it governs the noun directly. If any difference of meaning was intended, it is probably not greater than that between find and find out in English.

10 (9.) Thon shall make them like a fiery furnace at the time of thy 'presence; Jehovah in his wrath shall sivallow them up, and jive shall devour them. The ascription of this destroying agency to God in the last clause serves to show that the king acts merely as his instrument. Thou shall make, literally set or place, i. e. put them in such or such a situation. A fiery furnace, literally, a furnace (or oven) of fire. To make them like a furnace here means, not to make them the destroyers of others, but, by a natural abbreviation, to make them as if they were in a fiery furnace. At the time of thy presence, literally thy face, which may be understood to mean, when thou lookest at them.

11 (10.) Their fruit shalt thou make to perish from the earth, and their seed from {among) the sons of man (or Adam.) This extends the  threatened destruction of the enemies to al! their generations.    The same figurative use of fruit occurs in Hos. ix. 16.

<!-- PAGE 197 -->
12 (11.) For they stretched out evil over thee; they devised a plot; they shall not he able (to effect it.) The figure of the first clause is the same as in 1 Ch. xxi. 10. (Compare 2 Sam.xxiv. 12.) The idea here is that they threatened to bring evil on thee As the verb to be able is sometimes used absolutely, it translated, they shall not prevail.

13 (12.) For thou shalt make them turn their back; with thy (bow) strings shalt make ready against their face. The common version of the first word (therefore) is not only contrary to usage, but disturbs the sense by obscuring the connexion with the foregoing verse, which is this : ' they shalt not prevail, because thou 6halt make them turn their back.' This last phrase, in Hebrew, is so strongly idiomatic that it scarcely admits of an exact translation. Thou shalt make (or place) them shoulder. See above, on Ps. xviii. 41 (40), where a similar idiom occurs. In the verse before us, the chronological succession is re-versed ; it was by shooting at their face that he should make them turn their back. The true relation of the clauses is denoted, in the English Bible, by supplying a particle of time: 'thou shalt make them turn their back (when) thou shalt make ready (thine arrows) upon thy strings against the face of them.' The version make ready is also a correct one, although some translate the phrase take aim, which is really expressed by another form of the same verb. The true sense of the one here used is clear from Ps. xi. 2, and the distinctive use of both from Ps vii. 13, 14 (12, 13.)

14 (13.) Be high, Jehovah, in thy strength; we will sing and celebrate thy power. Here the Psalm returns to God as its great theme, and gives him all the glory.    Be high, exalted, both in
