<!-- psalm 26 | vol 1 | scan pages 237-241 -->

<!-- PAGE 237 -->
An appeal to God's justice and omniscience, vs. 1—3, enforced by a disavowal of all sympathy and communion with the wicked, vs. 4—6, and a profession of devotion to God's service, vs. 7, 8, with an earnest prayer to be delivered from the death of those whose life he abhors, v. 9, 10, and an expression of strong confidence that God will hear his prayer, vs 11, 12. There is a certain similarity of form between this psalm and the foregoing, which, together with their collocation in the Psalter, makes it not improbable that they were designed to constitute a pair or double psalm.

1. By David. Judge me, Jehovah, for I in my integrity have walked, and in Jehovah I have trusted; I shall not swerve (or slip). The correctness of the title is confirmed by the resemblance of the psalm itself to several, the authorship ol which is undisputed, more especially Ps. xv, xvii, xviii, xxiv.—■ Judge me, do me justice, vindicate or clear me. See above, on Ps. xvii. 1, 2.—In my integrity of purpose and of principle. To this is added its inseparable adjunct, trust in God.— Walked, lived, pursued a certain course of conduct. See above, on Ps. i. 1. The last clause is by some explained as the expression of a wish, let me not be moved. But there is no reason for departing from the strict sense of the future, as expressing a confirm anticipation.    Sicerve, as in Ps. xviii. 37 (36)  xxxvii. 31

<!-- PAGE 238 -->
2. Try me, Jehovah, a?id prove me; assay my reins and my heart. The first verb is supposed by etymologists to signify originally trial by touch, the second by smell, and the third by fire. In usage, however, the second is constantly applied to moral trial or temptation, while the other two are frequently applied to the testing of metals by the touchstone or the furnace. This is indeed the predominant usage of the third verb, which may therefore be represented by the technical metallurgic term, assay. See above, on Ps. xvii. 3, where two of the same verbs occur.—Reins and heart are joined, as seats of the affections. See above, on Ps. vii. 10 (9.)—The prayer of this verse is an appeal to God's omniscience for the psalmist's integrity of purpose, which agrees much better with the context than the explanation of n&'Ha as a participle and of the last clause as an affirmation, 'purified (or purged) are my reins and my heart.

3. For thy mercy (is) before m eyes, and I have walked it. thy truth. This verse assigns a reason for his confident per suasion that he shall not slide, to wit, because God's mercy is before his eyes, literally, in front of them, i. e. constantly in view, as an object of memory and ground of hope. He is also encouraged by his previous experience of God's truth or faithfulness. See above, on Ps. xxv. 5. The verb translated walked is an intensive form of that used in v. 1 above and v. 11 below. It means properly to walk about or to and fro, and expresses more distinctly than the primitive verb the idea of continuous habitual action. 4 My constant experience of thy mercy and thy faithfu'.ness assure me that I shall not fall away hereafter.'

4. I have not sat with men of falsehood, and with hidden {inen) I will not go. He is further encouraged to believe that he will be sustained because he has not hitherto-espoused the cause of those who hate God.—Men of falsehood, liars or deceivers, which appears to suit the context better than the wider sense of vain men, i. e. destitute of all moral goodness, good for nothing, worthless. See above, on Ps. v. 7 (6) xxiv. 4. The same class of persons are described in the last clause as masked, disguised, or hypocritical.—Sat, not merely in their company, but in their councils, taking part in their unlawful machinations. The change of tense is any thing rather than unmeaning. ' ] liave not sat with them in time past, and I will not go with *hem in time to come.' The form of expression is borrowed from Gen. xlix. 6.

<!-- PAGE 239 -->
6. I will wash in innocence my hands, and will compass thy altar, oh Jehovah ! To the negative professions of the two preceding verses he now adds a positive declaration of his purpose. Not content with abstaining from all share in the counsels of the wicked, he is fully resolved to adhere to the service of the Lord. He will cleanse himself from all that would unfit him for that service, and then cleave to the sanctuary where God dwells. The expression in the first clause seems to be copied from Gen. xx. 5, and the symbol or emblem from Deut. xxi. 6. (Compare Matt, xxvii. 24.) Whether compassing the altar be explained to mean going round it in procession, or embracing it, the idea expressed is still that of close adherence and devoted attachment.

7» To make known with a voice of thanksgiving, and to recount all thy wondrous works. The object of the acts described in the preceding verse was to promote God's glory. To make known, literally to cause to hear or to be heard. The clause admits of several constructions. 1. To publish thanksgivings with the voice 2. To publish with a thankful voice, without expressing what. 3. To publish and recount all thy wondrous works with a voice of thanksgiving. The last is on the whole entitled to the preference.—The last word in the Terse is a passive participle meaning wonderfully made or done. The plural feminine is used indefinitely like the neuter m Greek and Latin, to mean things done wonderfully, which is also the idea of the common version, icondrous ivories.

<!-- PAGE 240 -->
8. Jehovah, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place of the dwelling of thy glory. This verse expresses more directly and literally the idea of v. 6 above, and shows that his compassing the altar was intended to denote his love for the earthly residence of God, the altar being there put for the whole sanctuary, which is here distinctly mentioned. The habitation of thy house might be understood to mean a residence in it; but the usage of the first noun and the parallelism show that it rather means the place where thy house divells, perhaps in allusion to the migratory movements of the ark and its appendages before the time of David. So too in the last clause, Hebrew usage would admit of the translation, thy glorious dwelling place, as in Ps. xx. 7 (6); but the use of *n23 in the Pentateuch to signify the visible presence of Jehovah (Ex. xxiv. 16. xl. 34, 35) seems decisive in favour of explaining it the place where thy glory dwells, i. e. where the glorious God is pleased to manifest his presence.

9. Take not away my soul with sinners, and with men of blood my life. The primary meaning of the first verb is to gather, as a harvest or as fruit, a figure not unfrequently applied in various languages to death, here described as the taking away of the life or soul. This verse and the next contain a prayer that he may die as he has lived ; that since he has had no community of interest or feeling with ungodly men in life, he may not be united with them in his death.—Men of blood, literally bloods, i. e. murderers, either in the strict sense or by metonymy for sinners of the worst class. See above, on Ps. v. 7 (6.)    Another idiomatic plural in this sentence is the word lives at the end. which is used as an abstract   simply equivalent to life in English.

<!-- PAGE 241 -->
10. In whose hands is crime, and their right hand is filled with a bribe. The first clause exhibits the peculiar construction of the relative in Hebrew with the personal pronoun expressed, of which it is the substitute in other languages. Who (or as to whom)—in their hands (is) crime. This last word, (rrat) is a very strong one, used in the Law to denote specifically acts of gross impurity, but signifying really any wicked act or purpose. The common version, mischief, is too weak. The last word in the verse denotes especially a judicial bribe (Ps. xv. 5), and may be intended to suggest that the whole description has reference to unrighteous rulers, or to wicked men in public office.

11. And I in my integrity will walk; redeem me and bt> merciful to me. The use of the conjunction and emphatic pronoun is the same as in Ps. ii. 6 above. Our idiom would require an adversative conjunction, but I, in opposition to the sinners just described, but as for me, I will still walk as-1 have done in sincerity and simplicity of purpose. The obvious contrast of the tenses here and in v. 1 may serve to show how seldom they are used promiscuously or confounded.—That the Psalmist's perfection or integrity was neither absolute nor inherent, is clear from the petition of the last clause. He expects still to be perfect, not because he is without sin, but because he hopes to be redeemed from its dominion through the mercy of Jehovah.

12. My foot stands in an even place ; in the assemblies will I bless Jehovah. As a state of danger and distress miffht be compared to a precipitous and rugged path, so one of ease and safety is denoted by a smooth or level path.— My foot (now)
