<!-- psalm 28 | vol 1 | scan pages 249-253 -->

<!-- PAGE 249 -->
As in the preceding psalm a righteous sufferer prays that ha may not be confounded with the wicked whom his soul abhors, so here a like prayer is offered by the Anointed of Jehovah. He first prays in general for audience and acceptance, without which he must quickly perish, vs. 1, 2. He then asks to be distinguished from the wicked in the infliction of God's judgments, vs. 3—5. He then gives thanks for the anticipated answer to his prayer, vs. 6—8, and implores an extension of the blessing to all God's people at all times, v. 9. The collocation of the psalm is clearly not fortuitous, but founded on its close resemblance to the one before it.

1. By David. Unto thee, Jehovah, will I call; my rock, be not silent from me, lest thou hold thy peace from me, a?id I be made like to those going down (into) the pit. My rock, the immovable foundation of my hope and object of my trust. See above, on Ps. xviii. 3, 32 (2, 31.) xix. 15 (14.) That God is such, affords a sufficient reason for the importunate demands which follow. It is inconsistent with the relation he sustains to those who trust him, that he should be silent when they pray, i. e. refuse to answer. The ideas of distance and estrangement are really implied in being silent, and suggested by the pregnant construction silent from. The meaning of the last clause is correctly given, with a change of idiom, in the English version, lest, if thou be silent, &c.    The passive verb does not merelv mean to be like, but to be made like, assimilated, confounded. The pit, the grave, both in its narrower and wider sense. (Compare Isai. xiv. 15, 19.) Those going down into the pit is a common description of the dead. See Ps. xxx. 4 (3.) Ixxxviii. 5 (4), and compare Ps. xxii. 30 (29.)

<!-- PAGE 250 -->
2. Hear the voice of my supplications, in my crying unto thee (for help); in my lifting up my hands to thy holy orach. In my crying, in my lifting, i. e. at the time of my so doing, when I am in the very act. Tiie lifting up of the hands is a natural symbol of the raising of the heart or the desires to God, and is therefore often mentioned in connexion with the act of prayer. Ex. ix. 29. xvii. 11, 12. 1 Kings viii. 22, 54. Lam. ii. 19. hi. 41. Ps. lxiii. 5 (4.)—The word translated oracle is derived from the verb to speak, and seems to mean a place of speaking or conversation, like the English parlour from the French parler. Now we learn from Ex. xxv. 22. Num. vii. 89, that the place whence God talked with Moses was the inner apartment of the tabernacle; and from 1 Kings vi. 19, that the corresponding part of the temple bore the name here used. To this, as the depository of the ark and the earthly residence of God, the ancient saints looked as we look now to Christ, in whom the idea of the Mosaic sanctuary has been realized. See above, on Ps. v. 8 (7.)

3. Draiv me not aivay with wicked (men), and with workers of iniquity, speaking peace withthei^ neighbours, and evil (is) in their heart. This is the prayer for which he bespeaks audience and acceptance in the foregoing verse. Draw me not away, i. e. to punishment or out of life. Compare Ps. xxvi. 9, where the parallel expression is gather me not. In both cases he prays that he may not be confounded in his death with those whose life he abhors. The last clause exhibits a particular trait in the character of the wicked men and evil doers of tha other clause. This trait is hypocritical dissimulation, the pre^ tence of friendship as a mask to hatred. The simple construe* tion with the copulative and is equivalent to our expressions, but though, while, etc.

<!-- PAGE 251 -->
4. Give to them according to their act, a?id according to tk& evil of their deeds, according to the work of their hands give thou to them ; return their treatment to them. Having prayed that he may not share the destruction of the wicked, he now prays that they may not escape it. But as this is merely asking God to act as a just rmd holy being must act, the charge of vindictive cruelty is not merely groundless but absurd.—The evil of their deeds is a phrase borrowed from Moses (Deut. xxviii. 20) and often repeated by Jeremiah (iv. 4. xxi. 12. xxiii. 2, 22. xxvi. 3. xliv. 22.) The same prophet has combined two of the phrases here employed in Jer. xxv. 14 and Lam. iii. 64. The word translated treatment is a participle meaning that which is done by one person to another, whether good or evil. See above, on Ps. vii. 5 (4.)

5. Because they will not attend to the acts of Jehovah and to the doing of his hands, he will pull them dowii and will not build them up. Having appealed to the divine justice foi a righteous recompense of these offenders, he now shows wha/ they have deserved and must experience, by showing what they have done, or rather not done. The acts of Jehovah and the works of his hands are common expressions for his penal judgments. See Ps. lxiv. 10 (9.) xcii. 5 (4.) Isai. v. 12. xxviii. 21. xxix. 23.—Pull down and not build up, is an idiomatic combination of positive and negative terms to express the same idea.—Build, therefore, does not mean rebuild, but is simply i the negative or opposite of pull down. The form of expression is copied repeatedly by Jeremiah (xxxi. 28. xlii. 10. xlv. 4.) See also Job xii. 14.

<!-- PAGE 252 -->
6. Blessed (be) Jehovah, because he hath heard the voice of my supplicatio?is "What he asked in v, 2 he has now ob« tained, or at least the assurance of a favourable answer, in the confident anticipation of which he begins already to bless God. The word translated supplications means, according to its etymology, prayers for grace or mercy.

7. Jehovah my strength and my shield ! In him has my heart trusted, and I have been helped, and my heart shall exult, and by my song I will thank (or praise) him. The con struction of the first clause as a proposition, by supplying the substantive verb, Jehovah (is) my strength and my shield, is unnecessary, and neither so simple nor so strong as that which makes it a grateful and admiring exclamation.—My heart is twice used in this sentence to express the deep and cordial nature of the exercises which he is describing. The same heart that trusted now rejoices. As he believed with all his heart, so now he rejoices in like manner.—By my song, literally from or out of it, as the source and the occasion of his praise Compare Ps. xxii. 26 (25.)

8. Jehovah (is) strength to them, and a strong-hold of sal' vation (to) his Anointed (is) He. The Psalmist having spoken hitherto not only for himself but for the people, here insensibly substitutes the third person plural for the first person singular. In the last clause he reverts to himself, but with the use of an expression which discloses his relation to the people, of which he was not only a member but the delegated head, the Anointed of Jehovah. See above, on Ps. ii. 2. A strong-hold. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 1.—Salvations, full salvation. See above on Ps. xviii. 51 (50.) The personal pronoun at the end of the sentence is emphatic and intended to concentrate the attention upon one great object.

<!-- PAGE 253 -->
9. Oh save thy people, and bless thy heritage, and feed them, and carry (or exalt them) even to eternity ! The whole* psalm closes with a prayer that the relation now subsisting between God and his people may continue forever. Thy heritage, thy peculiar people, whom thou dost preserve and treat as such from generation to generation. The idea and expression are Mosaic. See Deut. ix. 29, and compare Ps. xxxiii. 12. Ixviii. 10 (9.) xciv. 5. The image then merges into that of a shepherd and his flock, a favourite one with David and throughout the later Scriptures. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 1.—Feed them, not only in the strict sense, but in that of doing the whole duty of a shepherd. The next verb is by some translated carry them, in which sense the primitive is elsewhere used in speaking of a shepherd (Isai. xl. 11), and this very form appears to have the same sense in Isaiah lxiii. 9, while in 2 Sam. v. 12 it is applied to the exaltation of David himself as a theocratic sovereign.
