<!-- psalm 3 | vol 1 | scan pages 34-48 -->

<!-- PAGE 34 -->
otner conquered nations against David, or to any similar rebellion against any of the later Jewish kings, as the principal subject of this grand description, makes it quite ridiculous if not profane, and cannot therefore be consistent with the principles of sound interpretation. The utmost that can be conceded is that David borrowed the scenery of this dramatic exhibition from the wars and insurrections of his own eventful reign. The language of the rebels in the verse before us is a genuine expression of the feelings entertained, not only in the hearts of individual sinners, but by the masses of mankind, so far as they have been brought into collision with the sovereignty of God and Christ, not only at the time of his appearance upon earth, but in the ages both before and after that event, in which the prophecy, as we have seen, attained its height, but was not finally exhausted or fulfilled, since the same rash and hopeless opposition to the Lord and his Anointed still continues, and is likely to continue until the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, (Rev. xi. 15), an expression borrowed from this very passage.

4. As the first strophe or stanza of three verses is descriptive of the conduct of the rebels, so the next describes the corresponding action of their sovereign, in precisely the same order, telling first what he does (in vs. 4, 5), and then what he says (in v. 6), so that these two stanzas are not only regular in their interna] structure but exactly fitted to each other. This symmetrical adjustment is entitled to attention, as that feature cf the Hebrew poetry which fills the place of rhythm and metre in the poetry of other nations. At the same time it facilitates interpretation, when allowed to speak for itself without artificial or unnatural straining, by exhibiting the salient points of the passage in their true relation. The transition here is a sublime one, from the noise and agitation of earth to the safety and tranquillity of heaven.    No shifting of the scene could  be more dramatic in effect or form.    While the nations and  theii kings exhort each other to cast off their allegiance to Jehovah, and  thereby virtually to dethrone  him,   he  reposes far above them  and beyond their reach.    Sitting in the licavcns,  i. e esident and rei^nins;  there, lie laughs or will lau^h.    This figure, strong and almost startling  as it is, cannot  possibly be misunderstood   by any reader,  as a vivid   expression of  contemptuous security on God's part, and of impotent folly on the part of men.    At them may be supplied from    Ps. xxxvii. 13, and lix. 9 (S) ; but it is not necessary, and the picture is perhaps more perfect, if we understand the laughter here to be simply expressive of contempt, and  the idea of directly laughing at them to be first suggested in the other clause.     The Lord, not Jehovah, as  in v. 2, but Adhonai, the  Hebrew word properly denoting Lord or Sovereign as a divine title, the Lord shall mock them, or mock at them, as the strongest possible expression of contempt.    This verse conveys in the most vivid manner, one indeed that would be inadmissible  in any uninspired writer,  the  fatuity of all  rebellious  opposition to  God's will. That such is often suffered  to  proceed  long with impunity, is only, in  the  figurative language of this passage, because Gcd first   laughs   at   human   folly   and   then   smites   it.    " "Who thought," says Luther, "when  Christ suffered and  the  Jews triumphed, that God  was  laughing all  the  time V    Beneath this bold  anthropomorphism there is hidden a profound  truth, namely, that to all superior  beings, and  above all to God  himself, there is something; in sin not only odio.is but absurd, some* thing  which  cannot possibly escape the  contempt of  higher much less of the highest intelligence.

<!-- PAGE 35 -->
5. This contemptuous repose and seeming indifference shall not last forever. The/?, after having thus derided them, then, as the next stage in this fearful process, he will speak to them, as they, after ri:>iiig  up against him, spoke to one another in v.

<!-- PAGE 36 -->
3. A ndin his heat, i. e. his hot displeasure, the wrath to which the laughter of v. 4 was but a prelude, he will agitate them, terrify them, make them quake with fear, not as a separate act from that described in the first clause, but by the very act of speaking to them in his anger, the words spoken being given in the following verse.

6. The divine address begins, as it were, in the middle of a sentence ; but the clause suppressed is easily supplied, being tacitly involved in what precedes. As if he had said, you renounce your allegiance and assert your independence, and J, on my part, the pronoun when expressed in Hebrew being commonly emphatic, and here in strong antithesis to those who are addressed. You pursue your course and I mine. The trans]ation yet, though inexact and arbitrary, brings out the antithesis correctly in a different form from that of the original. And I have constituted, or created, with allusion in the Hebrew to the casting of an image, or as some less probably suppose to unction, I have constituted my King, not simply a king, nor even the king, neither of which expressions would be adequate, but my king, one who is to reign for me and in indissoluble union with me, so that his reigning is identical with mine. This brings out still more clearly the intimate relation of the Anointed to Jehovah, which had been indicated less distinctly in v. 2, and thus prepares us for the full disclosure of their mutual relation in v. 7. And I have constituted my King tipo?i Zion, my hill of holiness, or holy hill, i. e. consecrated, set apart, distinguished from all other hills and other places, as. the seat of the theocracy, the royal residence, the capital city, of the Lord and of his Christ, from the time that David took up his abode, and deposited the ark there. The translation over Zion would convey the false idea, that Zion was itself the kingdom over which this sovereign was toieign, whereas  it  was onlv the  visible  and temporary  centre  of a l4 PSALM   II. kingdom coextensive with the earth, as we expressly read in v. 8 below. This shows that the application of the verse before us to David himself, although intrinsically possible, is utterly at variance with the context and the whole scope of the composition.

<!-- PAGE 37 -->
7. We have here another of those changes which impart to this whole psalm a highly dramatic character. A third personage is introduced as speaking without any formal intimation in the text. As the first stanza (v. 1—3) closes with the words of the insurgents, and the second (v. 4—6) with the words of the Lord, so the third (vs. 7—9) contains the language of the king described in the preceding verse, announcing with his own lips the law or constitution of his kingdom. I will declare, or let me declare*, the same form of the verb as in v. 3, the decree, the statute, the organic law or constitution of my kingdom. The Hebrew verb is followed by a preposition, which may be expressed in English, without any change of sense, by rendering the clause, I will declare, or make a declaration, i. e. a public, formal announcement, {as) to the law or constitution of my kingdom. This announcement is then made in a historical form, by reciting what had been said to the king at his inauguration or induction into office. Jehovah said to one, My son (art) thou, this day have I begotten thee. Whether this be regarded as a part of the decree or law itself, or as a mere preamble to it, the relation here described is evidently one which carried with it universal dominion as a.necessary consequence, as well as one which justifies the use of the expression my king in v. 6. It must be something more then than a figure for intense love or peculiar favour, something more than the filial relation which the theocratic kings, and Israel as a nation, bore to God. (Ex. iv. 22. Deut. xiv. 1, 2. xxxii. 6. Isai. Ixiii. 16. [ios. xi. 1. Mali. G. Rom. ix. 4.) Nor will any explanation of the terms fully meet the  requisitions of the context except one which supposes the relation here described as manifest in time to rest on one esser.tial and eternal. This alone accounts for the identification of the persons as possessing a common interest, and reigning with and in each other. This profound sense of the passage is no\more excluded by the phrase this day, implying something recent, than the universality of Christ's dominion is excluded by the local reference to Zion. The point of time, like the point of space, is the finite centre of an infinite circle. Besides, the mere form of the declaration is a part of the dramatic scenery or costume, with which the truth is here invested. The ideas of a king, a coronation, a hereditary succession, are all drawn from human and temporal associations. This day have I begotten thee may be considered therefore as referring only to the coronation of Messiah, which is an ideal one. The essential meaning of the phrase I have begotten thee is simply this, I am thy father. The antithesis is perfectly identical with that in 2 Sam. vii. 14, "I will be his father, and he shall be my son." Had the same form of expression been used here, this day am I thy father, no reader would have understood this day as limiting the mutual relation of the parties, however it might limit to a certain point of time the formal recognition of it. It must also be observed, that even if this day be referred to the inception of the filial relation, it is thrown indefinitely back by the form of reminiscence or narration in the first clause of the verse. Jehovah said to me, but when ? If understood to mean from everlasting or eternity, the form of expression would be perfectly in keeping with the other figurative forms by which the Scriptures represent things really ineffable in human language. The opinion that this passage is applied by Paul, in Acts xiii. 33, to Christ's resurrection, rests upon a misapprehension of the verb raised iqi, which has this specific meaning only when determined by the context or the addition of the words from the dead, as in the next verse of the game chapter, wlrch is  so far  from requiring the more general expressions of the preceding verse to be taken in the same sense, that it rather forbids such a construction, and shows that the two verses speak of different stages in the same great process, first the raising up of Jesus in the same sense in which God is said to have raised him up in /Acts ii. 30\iii. 22, 26. vii. 36, i. e. bringing him into being as a man, and then the raising up from the dead, which the Apostle himself introduces as another topic in Acts xiii. 34. There is nothing, therefore, inconsistent with the statement that the Psalmist here speaks of eternal sonship, either in the passage just referred to, or in Iieb v. 5, where the words are only cited to prove the solemn recognition of Christ's sonship, and his consequent authority, by God himself. This recognition was repeated, and, as it were, realized at our Saviour's baptism and transfiguration (Matth. iii. 17. xvii. 5), when a voice from heaven said, " This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him !"

<!-- PAGE 39 -->
8. The recital of Jehovah's declaration to his Son is still con* tinued. Ask of me and I will give nations (as) thy heritage, i. e. thy portion as my son, and (as) thy (permanent) possession, from a verb denoting to hold fast, the ends of the earth, a common Old .Testament expression for the whole earth, the remotest bounds and all that lies between them. The phrase is never applied to a particular country, and cannot therefore be explained of Palestine or David's conquests, without violently changing the sublime to the ridiculous. The only subject, who can be assumed and carried through without absurdity, is the Messiah, who, as the Son and heir of God, had a right to ask this vast inheritance. That he had asked it and received it, is implied in the dominion claimed for him in vs. 2 and 3, where the nations are represented in revolt against him as their rightful sovereign. It was to justify this claim that the divine decree is here recited, the constitution of Messiah's kingdom, in which its limits are defined as coextensive with the earth.

<!-- PAGE 40 -->
9. This extensive grant had been accompanied by that of pow?r adequate to hold it. That power was to be exercised in wrath as well as mercy. The former is here rendered prominent, because the previous context has respect to audacious rebelc, over whom Messiah is invested with the necessary power of punishment, and even of destruction. Thou shalt break them ivith a rod (or sceptre) of iron, as the hardest metal, and therefore the best suited to the use in question. By a slight change of pointing in the Hebrew, it may be made to mean, thou shalt feed them (as a shepherd) with a rod of iron, which is the sense expressed in several of the ancient versions, and to which there may be an ironical allusion, as the figure is a common one to represent the exercise of regal power. (See for example 2 Sam. vii. 7, and Micah vii. 14.) Like a potter's vessel thou shalt shiver them, or dash them in pieces, which last however weakens the expression by multiplying words. The idea suggested by the last comparison is that of easy and immediate destruction, perhaps with an implication of worthlessness in the object. This view of the Messiah as a destroyer is .in perfect keeping with the New Testament doctrine, that those who reject Christ will incur an aggravated doom, and that Christ himself is in some sense the destroyer of those who will not let him be their Saviour, or, to borrow termi from one of his own parables, m strict agreement with the scene presented by the psalm before us, " those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and sla'j them before me." (Luke xix. 27.) That false view of the dirine nature which regards God as delighting in the death of the sinner, is more revolting but not more dangerous than that which looks upon his justice as extinguished by his mercy, and supposes that the death of Christ has rendered perdition impossible, even to those who will not believe in him. The terms of this verse are repeatedly applied to Christ in the Book of Revelation (ii. 27. xii. 5. xix. 15.)

<!-- PAGE 41 -->
10. The description having reached its height in the preced ing verse, there is here a sudden change of manner, a transition to the tone of earnest admonition, still addressed, however, to the characters originally brought upon the scene. And now (oh) kings, after all that you have seen and heard, after this demonstration that you cannot escape from the dominion of Messiah, and that if you persist in your rebellion he will certainly destroy you, be wise, act wisely; be learned, be admonished of your danger and your duty, (oh) judges of the earth! A specific function of the regal office is here used as an equivalent or parallel to kings in the first clause, just as rulers is employed for the same purpose in v. 2. The change of tone in this last strophe shows that the previous exhibition of Messiah as invested with destroying power was, as it usually is in Scripture, only introductory to another aspect of the same great object, which becomes more clear and bright to the conclusion of the psalm. At the same time the original dramatic structure is maintained; for the speaker, in this closing stanza, is the Psalmist himself.

11. Serve the Lord, Jehovah, in the way that he requires, by acknowledging his Anointed as your rightful sovereign. Serve the Lord with fear, religious awe, not only on account of his tremendous majesty but also in view of his vindicatory justice and destroying power. And shout, as a customary recognition of a present sovereign, with trembling, an external sign of fear, employed as an equivalent or parallel to fear itself. The word translated shout may also mean rejoice, as joy is often publicly expressed by acclamation. The sense will then be, and rejoice with trembling, i. e. exercise those mingled feelings which arc suited to your present situation, in full view of God's wrath on one side, and his mercy on the other. This explanation  agrees well with the transition, in these veises. from the tone of terrible denunciation tc that of friendly admonition and encouragement.

<!-- PAGE 42 -->
12. Lest the exhortation, in the preceding verse, should seem to have respect to Jehovah as an absolute sovereign, without reference to any other person, the attention is again called to his King, his Anointed, and his Son, as the sovereign to whom homage must be paid in order to escape destruction. Kiss the So?t, an ancient mode of doing homage or allegiance to a king (1 Sam. x. 1), sometimes applied to the dress, and sometimes to the person, either of the sovereign or the subject himself. Even in modern European courts the kissing of the hand has this significance. In the case before us, there may possibly be an allusion to the kiss as a religious act among the heathen. (1 Kings xix. 18. Hos. xiii. 2. Job xxxi. 27.) Kiss the Son, the Son of God, the Messiah, so called by the Jews in Christ's time (John i. 50. Matth. xxvi. 63. Mark xiv. 61. Luke xxii. 70) ; do him homage, own him as your sovereign, lest he be angry, and ye lose the way, i. e. the way to happiness and heaven, as in Ps. i. 6, or perish from the ivay, which is the same thing in another form, or perish by the way, i. e. before you reach your destination. All these ideas are suggested by the Hebrew phrase, which is unusual. The necessity of prompt as well as humble submission is then urged. For his torath will soon burn, or be ki?idled. The translation, " when his wrath is kindled but a little," does not yield so good a meaning, and requires two of the original expressions to be taken in a doubtful and unusual sense. The same view of the Messiah as a judge and an avenger, which appeared in v. 9, is again presented here, but only for a moment, and as a prelude to the closing beatitude or benediction. Blessed {are) all, oh the felicities of all, those trusting him, believing on him and confiding in him. This delightful contrast of salvation and perdition, at one and the  same view, is characteristic of  the Scriptures 2Q PSALM   III. and should teach us not to look ourselves, and not to turn tho eyes of others, towards either of these objects without due regard to the other also. The resemblance in the language of this verse to that of Vs. i. 1 and 6, brings the two into connexion, as parts of one harmonious composition, or at least as kindred and contemporaneous products of a single mind, under the influence of one and the same Spirit. PSALM   III.

<!-- PAGE 43 -->
This Psalm contains a strong description of the enemies and dangers by which the writer was surrounded, and an equally strong expression of confidence that God would extricate him from them, with particular reference to former deliverances of the same kind. Its place in the collection does not seem to be fortuitous or arbitrary. It was probably among the first of David's lyrical compositions, the two which now precede it having been afterwards prefixed to the collection. In these three psalms there is a sensible gradation or progressive development of one great idea. The general contrast, which the first exhibits, of the righteous and the wicked, is reproduced, in the second, as a war against the Lord and his Anointed. In the third, it is still further individualized as a conflict between David, the great historical type of the Messiah, and his enemies. At the same time, the expressions are so chosen as to make the psalm appropriate to its main design, that of furnishing a vehicle of pious feeling to the church at large and to its individual mem bers, in their own emergencies.    The structure of the psalm is regular, consisting of four double verses?, besides the title.

<!-- PAGE 44 -->
1. A Psalm of David, literally {belonging) to David, i. e. as the author. This is not a mere inscription, but a part of the text and inseparable from it, so far as we can trace its history. It was an ancient usage, both among classical and oriental writers, for the author to introduce his own name into the first sentence of his composition. The titles of the psalms ought, therefore, not to have been printed in a different type, or as something added to the text, which has led some editors to omit them altogether. In all Hebrew manuscripts they bear the same relation to the body of the Psalm, that the inscriptions in the Prophets or in Paul's epistles bear to the substance of the composition. In the case before us, as in every other, the inscription is in perfect keeping with the psalm itself, as well as with the parallel history. Besides the author's name, it here states the historical occasion of the composition. A Psalm of David, in his fleeing, when he Red, from the face, from the presence, or before, Absalom his son. (See 2 Sam. xv. 14, 17, 30.) Such a psalm might well be conceived, and even composed, if not actually written, in the midst of the dangers and distresses which occasioned it. There is no need therefore of supposing the reference to be merely retrospective. That the terms used are so general, is because the psalm, though first suggested by the writer's personal experience, was intended for more general use.

2 (1). Oh Lord, Jehovah, the name of God as self-existent and eternal, and also as the covenant Gcd of Israel, how many, or how multiplied, are my foes, my oppressors or tormentors! This is not a question, but an exclamation of surprise and grief. Many rising up against me. The sentence may either be completed thus: many (are they) that rise up against me; o/ the construction of the other clause may be continued. {How) many (are there) rising up against me! The same periphrasis for e?iemies is used by Moses, Deut. xxviii. 7. What is here said of :he multitude of enemies agrees well with the historical statement in 2 Sam. xv. 13. xvi. 18.

<!-- PAGE 45 -->
3 (2). (There are) many saying, or, (hoiu) many (are there) saying, to my soul, i. e. so as to affect my heart, though really said of him, not directly addressed to him. (Compare Ps. xxxv. 3. Isai. li. 23.) There is no salvation, deliverance from evil, whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal. There is no salvation for him, the sufferer, and primarily the psalmist himself, in God, i. e. in his power, or his purpose, implying either that God does not concern himself about such things, Ps. x. 11, or that he has cast the sufferer off, Ps.xlii.4,11 (3,10). lxxi. 11. xxii.8,9.(7,8). Matth. xxvii. 43. This is the language, not of despondent friends, but of malignant enemies, and is really the worst that even such could say of him. For, as Luther well says, all the temptations in the world, and in hell too, melted together into one, are nothing when compared with the temptation to despair of God's mercy.—The first stanza, or double verse, closes, like the second and fourth, with the word Selah. This term occurs seventy-three times in the Psalms and three times in the prophecy of Habakkuk. It corresponds to rest, either as a noun or verb, and like it is properly a musical term, but generally indicates a pause in the sense as well as the performance. See below, on Ps. ix. 17 (1G). Like the titles, it invariably forms part of the text, and its omission by some editors and translators is a mutilation of the word of God. In the case before us, it serves as a kind of pious ejaculation to express the writer's feelings, and at the same time warns the reader to reflect on what he reads, just as our Saviour was accustomed to say. IIu that hath ears to hear let him hear.

<!-- PAGE 46 -->
4 (3). From his earthly enemies and dangers he looks up to God, the source of his honours and his tried protector. The connexion is similar to that between the fifth and sixth verses of the second psalm. The and (not but) has reference to a tacit comparison or contrast. This is my treatment at the hands of men, and thou, on the other hand, oh Lord, Jehovah, (art) a shield about me, or around me, i. e. covering my whole body, not merely a part of it, as ordinary shields do. This is a favourite metaphor with David; see Ps. vii. 11 (10). xviii. 3 (2). xxviii. 7. It occurs, however, more than once in the Pentateuch. See Gen. xv. 1. Deut. xxxiii. 29.—My honour, i. e. the source of the honours I enjoy, with particular reference, no doubt, to his royal dignity, not as a secular distinction merely, but in connexion with the honour put upon him, as a type and representative of Christ. The honour thus bestowed by God he might well be expected to protect. My honour, and the (o?ie) raising my head, i. e. making me look up from my despondency. The whole verse is an appeal to the Psalmist's previous experience of God's goodness, as a ground for the confidence afterwards expressed.

5 (4). (With) my voice to the Lord, Jehovah, Iivillcall, or cry. The future form of the verb is probably intended to express continued or habitual action, as in Ps. i. 2. I cry and will cry still. And he hears me, or, then he hears me, i. e. when I call. The original construction shows, in a peculiar manner, the dependence of the last verb on the first, which can hardly be conveyed by an exact translation. The second verb is not the usual verb to hear, but one especially appropriated to the gracious hearing or answering of prayer. And he hears (or answers) me from his hill of Iwliness, or holy hill. This, as we learn from Ps. ii. 6, is Zion, the seat and centre of the old theocracy, the place where God visibly dwelt among his people.    This designation of a certain spot, as the earthly residence of God, was superseded by the incarnation of his feon, whose person thenceforth took the place of the old sanctuary, [t was, therefore, no play upon words or fanciful allusion, »vhen our Saviour " spake of the temple of his body" (John ii. 21), but a disclosure of the true sen^e of the sanctuary under the old system, as designed to teach the doctrine of God's dwelling with his people. The same confidence with which the Christian now looks to God in Christ the old believer felt towards the holy hill of Zion. Here again the strophe ends with a devout and meditative pause, denoted as before by Sclah.

<!-- PAGE 47 -->
6 (5). /, even I, whose case you regarded as so desperate, have lain down, and slept, {and) awaked, notwithstanding all these dangers, for the Lord, Jehovah, ivill sustain one, and I therefore have no fears to rob me of my sleep. This last clause is not a reason for the safety he enjoys, which would require the past tense, but for his freedom from anxiety, in reference to which the future is entirely appropriate. This construction, the only one which gives the Hebrew words their strict and full sense, forbids tlie supposition that the Psalm before us was an evening song, composed on the night of David's flight from Jerusalem. If any such distinctions be admissible or necessary, it may be regarded as a morning rather than an evening hymn.

7 (G). The fearlessness implied in the preceding verse is here expressed. I ivill not be afraid of myriads, or multitudes, the Hebrew word being used both in a definite and vague sense. It also contains an allusion to the first verb in v. 2 (1), of which it is a derivative. I ivill not be afraid, of myriads of people, either in the sense of persons, men, or by a poetic license for the people, i. e. Israel, the great mass of whom had now revolted. Whom they, my enemies, have set, or posted, round about against me.   This is a simpler and more accurate construction than the reflexive one, who have set (themselves) against me round about, although the essential meaning still remains the same. The sum of the whole verse is, that the same courage, which enabled him to sleep without disturbance in the midst of enemies and dangers, still sustained him when those enemies and dangers were presented to his waking senses.

<!-- PAGE 48 -->
8 (7). That this courage was not founded upon self-reliance, he now shows by asking God for that which he before expressed his sure hope of obtaining. Arise, oh Lord, Jehovah! This is a common scriptural mode of calling upon God to manifest his presence and his power, either in wrath or favour. By a natural anthropomorphism, it describes the intervals of such manifestations as periods of inaction or of slumber, out of which he is besought to rouse himself. Save me, even me, of whom they say, there is no help for him in God. See above, v. 3 (2). Save me, oh my God, mine by covenant and mutual engagement, to whom I therefore have a right to look for deliverance and protection. This confidence is warranted moreover by experience. For thou hast, in former exigencies, smitten all my enemies, without exception, (on the) cheek or jaw, an act at once violent and insulting. See 1 Kings xxii. 24. Micah iv. 14 (v. 1.) Lam. iii. 30. The teeth of the wicked, here identified with his enemies, because he was the champion and representative of God's cause, thou hast broken, cfnd thus rendered harmless. The image present to his mind seems to be that of wild beasts eager to devour him, under which form his enemies are represented in Ps. xxvii. 2.

9 (8). To the Lord, Jehovah, the salvation, which I need and hope for, is or belongs, as to its only author and dispenser. To him therefore he appeals for the bestowmeut of it, not on himself alone, but on the church of which he was the visible vol*,  i-        2 and temporary head. On thy people (be) thy blessing/ This earnest and disinterested intercession for God's people forms a noble close or winding np of the whole psalm, and is therefore preferable to the version, on thy people (is) thy blessing, which, though equally grammatical, is less significant, and indeed little more than a repetition of the fact asserted in the iirst clause, whereas this is really an importunate petition founded on it. The whole closes, like the first and second stanzas, with a solemn' and devout pause.    Selah.
