<!-- psalm 30 | vol 1 | scan pages 259-265 -->

<!-- PAGE 259 -->
After a title, giving the historical occasion of the psalm v. 1, the writer praises God for a signal deliverance from de 6truction, vs. 2—4 (1—3), and calls upon God's people to join in the praise of the divine compassion, vs. 5—6 (4—5.)    He then reverts to the cause of his affliction, vs. 7—8 (6—7), and recounts the  means which he employed for its removal, vs. 9—11 (8—10), and for the success of which he vows eicrna. thankfulness, vs. 12 (13), 11 (12.)    The occasion and design of the psalm will be considered in the exposition of the title or in pcription, which constitutes the first verse of the Hebrew text.

<!-- PAGE 260 -->
1. A Psalm. A Song of Dedication (for) the House. By David. The construction house of David, although not ungrammatical, is forced, as that idea would, according to usage, have been otherwise expressed in Hebrew. This construction has moreover given rise to the false notion, that the psalm has reference to the dedication of the king's own dwelling, whereas the Jwuse, as an absolute phrase, can only mean the house of God. The historical occasion of the psalm is furnished by the narrative in 2 Sam. xxiv and I Chron. xxi. David's presumption in numbering the people had been punished by a pestilence, which raged until the destroying angel had, in answer to the king's prayer, been required to sheathe his sword. The spot, where this indication of God's mercy had been given, waa immediately purchased by David, and consecrated by the erec* iion of an altar, upon which he offered sacrifices, and received the divine approbation in the gift of fire from heaven (1 Chr. xxi. 26.) This place the king expressly calls the house of God (1 Chr. xxii. 1), either in the wide sense of the patriarchal Bethel (Gen. xxviii. 17, 22), or as the designated site of the temple, for which he immediately commenced his preparations (1 Chr. xxii. 2), and in reference to which this psalm might well be called a song of dedication, although naturally more full of the pestilence, and the sin which caused it, than of the sanctuary yet to be erected.

2 (1.) I tail I exalt thee, oh Jehovah, because thou hast raisd me up, and hast not let my enemies rejoice respecting me. In the first clause there is an antithesis of thought, though not of form. ' I will raise thee because thou hast raised me.' The second verb is a modified form of one meaning to draw water from a well (Ex. ii. 16, 19), and may therefore have been chosen for the purpose of suggesting the idea of a person drawn up from some depth in which he had been sunk, a figure not unfrequent elsewhere.    See particularly Ps. xl. 3 (2) below — Hast not caused or permitted to rejoice by abandoning me to them.— ib does not properly mean over me, but as to me. The specific idea of rejoicing oxer is suggested by the context.

<!-- PAGE 261 -->
3 (2.) Jehovah, my God, I cried to thee (for help), and thou didst heal me. The address, my God, is never unmeaning or superfluous, but always intimates a covenant relation as the ground of confidence. Any severe suffering is represented in scripture under the figure of disease, and relief from it as healing. See above, on Ps. vi. 3 (2), and compare Ps. xli. 5 (4), cvii. 20. Jer. xiv. 19. xv. 18. xvii. 14. xxx. 17. The healing here meant is identical with the help in v. 4 (3) and the joy in v. 12 (11,) and proves nothing therefore as to literal sickness in the Psalmist's case. It is altogether natural, however, to suppose that David may himself have been affected by the prevalent disorder.

4 (3.) Jehovah, thou hast brought up out of hell my soul, thou hast made me alive from (among those) going dow* (into the) pit. The extremity of his danger is described in the strongest terms afforded by the language. The essential mean ing of both clauses is, that God had saved him from wha; seemed to be inevitable and irrecoverable ruin.—Hell, sheol, the state of the dead. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.)—Going down into the pit, i. e. dying. See above, on Ps. xxii. 30 (29.) —Made me alive from them, i. e. separated me from them by restoring or preserving my life, so that I no longer can be numbered with them.

5 (4.) Make music to Jehovah, ye his gracious ones, and give thanks to the memory of his holiness. The exhortation in the first clause is to praise God by song with instrumental accompaniment.    See above, on Ps. vii. 18 (7.) ix. 3, (2, lO His gracious ones, the objects of his mercy, and themselves endowed with the same attribute. See above, on Ps. iv. 4 (3.) —Memory, in this connexion, does not mean the power or the act of remembering, but that which is remembered when we think of God, to wit, his glorious perfections, which are summed up in his holiness, as to the comprehensive sense of which, see above, on Ps. xxii. 4 (3.) See also Hos. xii. 6 (5), where the memory of God is particularly coupled with his mercy, and Ex. iii. 15. Isai. xxvi. 8. Ps. cxxxv. 13, where memory and name are used as parallel expressions.

<!-- PAGE 262 -->
6 (5.) For a moment in his wrath, life in his favour; in the evening shall'lodge weeping, and at the morning shouting (or singing.) Some understand the contrast in the first clause to be one of duration; there is only a moment in his wrath, but a life-time in his favour. It is simpler, however, and more agreeable to the usage of the word translated life, to read the clause without an antithesis; his wrath endures but a moment, and then his favour restores life, in its wide sense, as including all that makes existence desirable. The same idea is expressed in the last clause by a beautiful figure. Sorrow is only a sojourner, a stranger lodging for the night, to be succeeded, at the break of day, by a very different inmate. This, though pri marily referring to the joys and sorrows of the present state, admits of a striking application to the contrast between this life and the next.    See above, on Ps. xvii. 15.

7 (6.) And I said in my security, I shall not be moved forever. The pronoun is emphatic : it was I that said.—rSecurity. The Hebrew word includes trie :deas of prosperity, and of that self-confidence which it produces. Compare Deut. viii. 11—18. xxxii. 15. Hos. xiii. 6. 2 Chr. xxxii. 25.—Moved, disturbed in my enjoyment, shaken from my present  firm position.    Sea above,  on Ps. x. 6. xvi. 8, and compare Ps. xiii. 5 (4). xv. 0 xxi. 8 (7.)

<!-- PAGE 263 -->
8 (9.) Jehovah, in thy favour thou didst establish to my mountain  strength; thou didst hide thy face, I was con founded.    It was only through God's mercy that his po\w» was established.— Thou didst confirm strength (literally make it stand) to my mountain, a common figure for royal power, and especially for that of the theocracy, the central point of which  was Mount Zion.     See   2 Sam. v. 9, 12. Neh. iii. 15. Mich. iv. 8. Isai. ii. 3.      The   idea of personal  prosperity in general, though not  expressed   directly,   is suggested by  the special case of David's official eminence.— Thou didst hide thy face, withdraw the tokens of thy presence and thy favour.    See above, on Ps. xiii. 2 (1.)—I was confounded, agitated, terrified perplexed.     See above, on Ps. vi. 3, 4, 11 (2, 3, 10,) and compare Ps. ii. 5.    The common version, troubled, is too weak.

9 (8.) TJnto thee Jehovah, will I call, and to Jehovah I wiL cry for mercy. This was the resolution formed at the time when God concealed his face and he was troubled. The insertion of the words then said I, at the beginning of the \ erse, would render the connexion clear, but is unnecessary. The translation of the futures as past tenses is a licence which could only be justified by extreme exegetical necessity, certainly not by the trivial circumstance, that the last clause speaks of Jehovah in the third person, which is not more surprising in a prayer than the second person of the first clause would be in a narrative. The sudden change of person is of course the same in either case.

10 (9.)   What profit (is there) in my blood, in my descend xng to corruption (or the grave) ?     Will dust praise (or thank) thee?     Will it tell thy truth?    This argument in favour of his being heard and rescued is the same as that in Ps. vi. 6 (5), and reappears in Ps. Ixxxviii. 11—13 (10—12), and in Hezekiah's psalm, Isai. xxxviii. 18, 19, both of which are obvious imitations of David. For the twofold etymology and sense of tflTD either of which is here appropriate, see above, on Ps. xvi. 10.—Dust, the lifeless and disorganized remains of the body.— Tell thy truths attest the truth of thy promises by reciting their fulfilment, and so bear witness to the divine veracity and faithfulness. The questions of course imply negation. * My destruction can be no advantage to the divine glory, but must rather involve a loss of praise.'

<!-- PAGE 264 -->
11 (10.) Hear, Jehovah, and have mercy on me; Jehovah, be a helper for (or to) me. This petition is an indirect conclusion from the reasoning of the preceding verse. The logical connexion may be made clear by a change of form. • Since thy glory will not be promoted by my death, I am entitled to deliverance, not for my sake but thy own.' This last idea is suggested by his appealing to the divine mercy, as the ground on which he asked God to become his helper.

12(11.) Thou hast turned my lament into a dance for me ; thou hast opened my sackcloth and hast girded me {with) joy. To his prayer he now adds the account of its fulfilment. The relief of his distress is described as an exchange of his lament or funeral song for a joyful dance. Compare Jer. xxxi. 13. Lam. v. 15. In further allusion to the mourning customs of the east, he represents his mourning dress, made of the coarsest hair-cloth, as now opened, i. e. loosened, unfastened, for the purpose of removal, to be replaced not merely by a gay or festive dress, but by joy itself, poetically represented as a garment. See above, on Ps. xviii. 33, 40 (32, 39), and cornpare Isai. lxi. 3.

<!-- PAGE 265 -->
13 (12.) In order that glory may make music to thee and not be dumb, Jehovah, my God, I will piaise thee (or give thanks to thee) forever. This verse describes not only the effect but ihe design of the deliverance asked for, and so furnishes a counterpart to the argument in v. 10 (9.) As the death of the psalmist would deprive God of praise, so his deliverance is intended to ensure it.—The use of glory in tne first clause is obscure. Some understand by it the tongue or voice, which is entirely arbitrary; others the soul, the nobler part of man, as in Ps. xvi. 9. lvii. 9. cviii. 2 (1.) But as the form in all these cases is my glory, it seems better to take glory here without the pronoun in the wide sense of every thing glorious, including the worshipper's highest powers and perhaps his regal dignity, as in Ps. vii. 6 (5.) As in God's temple every thing says "Glory!" (Ps. xxix. 9), so every thing glorious among his works is bound to praise him.—Not be dumb, a stronger phrase than not be silent.—With the last clause compare the words of Hezekiah, Isai. xxxviii. 20.
