<!-- psalm 31 | vol 1 | scan pages 265-275 -->

<!-- PAGE 265 -->
The psalmist first prays in general for deliverance from L.a sufferings and his enemies, on the ground of his confidence in God and previous experience of his mercy, vs. 2—9 (1—8.) He then prays more particularly for deliverance from his present Janger, with a description of the same, vs. 10—14 (9—13.) In the remainder of the psalm, the tone of supplication and complaint is gradually exchanged for that of thankful assurance, vs. 15—23 (14—22), and the whole is wound up with an application of the lesson furnished by the psalmist's experience to the case of all God's people, vs. 24—25 (23—24.)

<!-- PAGE 266 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm by David. Here we meet again with the inscription, to the chief musician, which has not appeared before since the title of Ps. xxii. As in all other cases, it explicitly describes the psalm as intended for musical performance in the public worship of the ancient church. As this, however, was the case with all the psalms, the fact that it is mentioned only in some may be explained by supposing, that in them there was something which might otherwise have caused them to be looked upon as mere expressions of personal feeling.—The correctness of the other clause—a Psalm of David—is fully attested by internal evidence. The idea that Jeremiah wrote it rests entirely on the imitation of the first clause of v. 14 (13) in Jer. xx. 10, which is in perfect keeping with the practice of that prophet.

2 (1.) In thee, Jehovah, have I trusted. Let one not be shamed for ever. In thy righteousness deliver me (or help me to escape?) The first clause contains the ground of the petitions following, which ground is the same that is often urged elsewhere, namely, that a just God cannot destroy those who trust him. See above, Ps. vii. 2 (1.) xi. 1.—The prayer in the next clause may be either that his present shame may not endure forever, or that he may never be put to shame, which last idea could not well be otheiwise expressed in Hebrew Shamed, i. e. utterly confounded, disappointed, and frustrated in his hopes. See above, on Ps. vi. 11 (10.) xxii. 6 (5.) xxv 2, 20. He appeals to God's righteousness or justice in tha strict sense, upon which trust or faith creates a claim, even oc the part of the unworthy, not by virtue of any intrinsic merit, but of God's gracious constitution.    See above, on Ps. xvii. 1 2 xviii. 21—25 (20—24.) xxv. 21. xxvi. 1. This verse and tha two following reappear, without material variation, in Ps. lxxi. 1—3.

<!-- PAGE 267 -->
3 (2.) Incline untc me thine ear; (i?i) haste deliver me ; be to me for a rock of strength for a house of defences to save me. The prayer for speedy deliverance implies extreme necessity and danger. For the meaning of the figures, rock of strength and house of defences or fortress, see above, on Ps. xviii. 3 (2,) and as to the plural form, on Ps. xviii. 51 (50.) xx. 7 (6.)—The petition of the first clause seems to imply that God had hitherto appeared to turn a deaf ear to his prayers. It may perhaps have been intended to suggest the additional idea, that his cry was feeble, so that it had hitherto escaped the ear of him to whom it was addressed, and who is now implored to bow down or incline his ear, that the distant sound may reach him.

4 (3.) For ??i2/ rock and my fortress (art) thou, and for thy name's sake thou wilt lead one and conduct me (or provide for me.) What he asks in the preceding verse he here asserts, to wit, that God is his protector, and must therefore of necessity protect him, not only for the sufferer's sake, but for the honour of his own name or manifested nature. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 3, for the meaning of this phrase, and on the second verse of the same psalm, for that of the last verb.—The futures in the second clause suggest the idea of necessity, and might perhaps be correctly rendered by the use of our auxiliary must.

5 (4.) Thou wilt bring me out from the net which tJiey have hid for me; for thou (art) my strength (or my stronghold.) ' By thee I confidently hope to be delivered from iae craft and malice of my enemies, for my defence and safety are in thee alone.'    With the first clause compare Ps. xxv. 15, and PSALM   XXXI. 24f With the last Ps. xxvii. 1.    The change of figure in the last clause shows the whole verse to be highly metaphorical.

<!-- PAGE 268 -->
6 (5.) Into thy hand I ivill commit my spirit; thou hast redeemed me, (oh) Jehovah, God of truth. The verb in the first clause means to entrust or deposit any thing of value. By my spirit we may either understand my life or myself but not my soul as distinguished from my body.—The preterite thou hast redeemed, expresses in the strongest manner his assured hope and the certainty of the event.—God of truth, veracity or faithfulness. See above, on Ps. xxv. 5, and compare Jer. x. 10. The words of the first clause of this verse were quoted or imitated by our Saviour on the cross (Luke xxiii. 46), which only proves that he considered himself one of those to whom the Psalm might be applied, but without excluding others ; and accordingly John Huss, while on his way to the stake, repeatedly quoted this whole verse as the expression of his own emotions.

7 (6.) I have hated those regarding vanities of falsehood\ and I (for my part) in Jehovah have confided. The present is included in the preterite of the first clause. ( I have hated them and hate them still.' 'I hate them and have dore so heretofore.' See above, Ps. xvi. 4. xxvi. 5.—Regarding, religiously observing,'waiting upon, watching with respect an'l trust. Compare Hos. iv. 10. Zech. xi. 11. Jon. ii. 9 (8.) This last place contains also the word vanities here used, and even in the Law applied to idols, as no gods, and as " nothing in the world" (1 Cor. viii. 4.) See Deut. xxxii. 21, and compare Jer. ii. 5. x. 15. xiv. 22. xvi. 19. xviii. 15. The words here combined are highly contemptuous, denoting vanities of emptiness or nothings of nonentity, presented in contrast to Jehovah God of truth, in whom the Psalmist has confided. And I, as opposed to them; see above, on Ps. ii. 6

<!-- PAGE 269 -->
8 (7.) I ivill triumph and joy in thy ??zercy, thou wJw hast see?i my affliction, hast known the pangs of my sold. In the strength of his faith he sees deliverance already present.—Hast known in the pangs of my soul, i. e. in the time of my distress hast been aware of it, which seems to be the meaning of this verb and preposition elsewhere (Gen. xix. 33, 35. Job. xxxv. 15.) Luther and others give a different construction, hast known my soul in distress, but the other is favoured by the occurrence of the phrase distress (or agonies) of soul in Gen. xlii. 21 and Ps. xxv. 17. The sight and knowledge here applied to God imply a corresponding action. ' Thou hast seen and known my state, and dealt with me accordingly.' With the first clause compare Ps. ix. 3 (2.)

9 (8.) And hast not shut me up in the hand of a foe, (but) hast made to stand in the ivide place my feet. To shut up in the hand of any one is to abandon to his power. The expression is a figurative one, but occurs in prose, and even in the history of David. See 1 Sam. xxiii. 11. xxvi. 8. The figure of the last clause is a favourite with David. See above, on Ps. iv. 2 (1.) xviii. 20, 37 (19, 36.)

10 (9.) Have mercy upon me, oh Jehovah, for distress is to me; sunken through grief is my eye, my soul and my belly. Having thus professed his confidence of ultimate deliverance, he reverts to his actual condition and prays for the divine interposition, on the ground of what he has already suffered. On the sinking or failing of the eye, as a sign of extreme grief and weakness, see above, on Ps. vi. 8 (7.) Having mentioned this as a specific symptom, he then uses the generic terms, soul and belly, i. e. body.—For the true sense of the word translated grief see above, on Ps. x. 14.

11 (10.) Fcr wasted with grief (oi indignation) is ?ny life and my years with sighing; my strength totters because of my iniquity, and my bones arc decayed. Wasted, consumed before the time.—Life and years, grief and sighing, are correlative expressions. Life is made up of years; grief is expressed by sighs and groans.—To totter or stumble is a verb applied elsewhere to the parts of the body—as the knees in Ps. cix. 24—here metaphorically to the strength itself.—Because of my iniquity or guilt is not inconsistent with the appeal to God's righteousness in v. 2 (1), but only proves that the Psalmist lays no claim to a sinless perfection. See above, on Ps. xviii. 24 (23.)—The bones are mentioned as the seat of strength, the solid frame-work of the body.—Decayed, grown old, worn out.    See below, on Ps. xxxii. 3.

<!-- PAGE 270 -->
12 (11.) By means of (or because of) all my adversaries I was a reproach, and to my neighbours very (much), and a fear to my acquaintances; seeing me in the street they fled from me (or those seeing me m the street fled from me) The first word properly meansyVow or out of It was from his enemies, both as the cause and the occasion, that his disgrace proceeded. A reproach, despised by others and considered a disgrace to them. See above, on Ps. xxii. 7 (6.) In the second clause there is an obvious progression. He was so esteemed not only by his fellow-men indefinitely, but by his neighbours, and that greatly ("to), which seems equivalent to saying 'and to none more than my neighbours,' or, ' above all to my neighbours.' In the last clause the climax is completed. Not only were his neighbours ashamed of him; his acquaintances were afraid of him. See below, -Ps. xxxviii. 12 (11), Ixix. 9 (8), lxxxviii. 19 (18), and compare Job xix. 13, 14.

13 (12.) I loas forgotten as a dead man out of mind ; I was like a broken vessel (or a vessel perishing.) The next stage of his calamity was that of contemptuous oblivicn, which usually 248 PSALM   JLXXI. follows the acute one of disgust and shame described in tha foregoing verse.—From the heart, i. e. the memory; the expression seems to correspond exactly to the second member of the English proverb: out of sight, out of mind.—The comparison with an earthen vessel, at best of little value, easily broken, and when broken worthless, only fit to be contemptuously thrown aside, is a favourite with Jeremiah, who appears to have derived it, with some other favourite ideas and expressions, from the psalm before us. See Jer. xix. 11. xxii. 28. xxv. 34. xlviii. 38, and compare Hos. viii. 8.

<!-- PAGE 271 -->
14 (13.) For I heard the slander of many—terror (was) all around—in their consulting together against me, to take my sold (or my life) they plotted. The for connects whac follows not so much with what immediately precedes as with the general description of his urgent need in v. 10 (9), Have mercy upon me, for distress is to me, of which he is about to <nve another proof or instance. The first clause is closely copied in Jer. xx. 10, and the phrase magor missabib (fear round about) is a favourite with that prophet. See Jer. vi. 25. XX. 3. xlvi. 5. xlix. 29, and compare Lam. ii. 22.—The term used for consulting is akin to that in Ps. ii. 2.—The connexion between the slander of the first clause and the plotting of the second seems to be, that the former was regarded as a necessary means to the successful execution of the latter.

15 (14.) And I on thee did trust, Jehovah; I said, my God (art) thou! ' Amidst these distresses, and in spite of them, I still confided in Jehovah, and expressed my confidence by solemnly avouching him to be my God, and therefore bound by covenant to save me, as I am no less bound by covenant to trust him.' It is worthy of remark how constantly the ancient saints make trust in God essential to all spiritual safety.— "V^Uh the last clause of this verse compare Ps. xvi. 1. PSALM   XXXI. 24S

<!-- PAGE 272 -->
16 (15.) In thy hand (are) my times ; set me free from the. hand of my foes and from my persecutors. By times we are to understand the current of events or the vicissitudes of life, as when we speak familiarly of good times, hard times, and the like. There may be also an allusion to the turning points or critical junctures of his history. The first clause presents the ground or reason of the second. ■ Since the events of my life are at thy disposal, set me free,' &c. Freeing from the hand is the opposite of shutting up in it. See above, on v. 9 (8.)— Foes and persecutors, not as distinct classes, but as different descriptions of the same.

17 (16.) Let thy face shine on thy servant; save me in thy mercy. The first clause contains an allusion to the sacerdotal benediction recorded in Num. vi. 25. See above, on Ps. iv. 7 (6,) where we have a similar allusion to that passage. ' Grant me a sensible assurance of thy favour.' This he asks because he is his servant, a relation implying the necessity of God's interposition in his favour. While God is God, he cannot leave his faithful servants to perish. Even here, however, his appeal is to God's mercy, as the only source or means of safety.

18 (17.) Jehovah, let me not be shamed, for I have called (upon thee.) Let the wicked be shamed, be silenced, in hell. He distinguishes himself, as one who calls upon God, from the wicked who do not, and appeals to the righteousness of God as requiring that defeat, and disappointment, and frustration of the hopes, should fall, not upon the class to which he belongs and of which he is the representative, but upon that represented by his enemies, of whom it has been well said, that they aie not reckoned sinners because they are his enemies, but enemies because they are sinners, or in other words, enemies to him because they are the enemies of God.—Silenced   in reference II* to their present loud  and angry contests with the righteous. —In hell, or in the grave, i. e. in death.

<!-- PAGE 273 -->
19 (18.) Struck dumb be the lips of lying, the (lips) speaking against a righteous (ma?i), insolently in pride and scorn. This wish has special reference to the slanders mentioned in v. 14 (13.)—Insolently, literally insolent, that which is insolent, or as an abstract, insolence, audacity.

20 (19.) How great is thy goodness which thou hast hidden for those fearing thee, (and) wrought for (those) trusting in thee before the son of man (or mankind)! Some suppose an antithesis between what God does secretly for those who trust him openly, or publicly profess their faith. Compare Matth. vi. 4. But usage and the masoretic accents are in favour of a different construction, which connects before the sons of man with ivrought, and supposes the antithesis to be between the two successive stages of God's dispensations towards believers, first what he does in secret, and then what he does in public. • How great is thy goodness which thou hast first treasured up, and then wrought openly before the sons of men for those who trust thee.'

21 (20.) Thou wilt secrete them in the secret of thy face (or presence) from the leagues of man ; thou ivilt hide them in a covert from the strife of tongues. A particular manifestation of this goodness is now specified, to wit, the protection of its objects from the craft and malice of their fellow-men. The figures are the same as in the first clause of Ps. xxvii. 5, except that the presence of God is substituted for his dwelling, which indeed derives its power of protection solely from that presence. The leagues ox plots of man are those mentioned in v. 14 (13), and the strife of tongues the slander there referred to; not the strife of tongues in mutual dispute among his enemies, but the. united strife of all their tongues against himself.

<!-- PAGE 274 -->
22 (21.) Blessed {be) Jehovah, for he hath made Ms mercy wonderful to me in a city of defence (ox fortified city.) What he had just asserted to be generally true of all believers, he now declares to have been verified in his own experience.— Has made his mercy wonderful, has exercised surprising mercy, or in modern phrase, has been wonderfully gracious. —In a fenced city is by some understood to mean as such a city, a comparison which really occurs in other places. For another supposed instance of the same construction, see above, on Ps. xxix. 4.    In this case, however, as in that, the strict

"sense of the particle may be retained, not only without injury but with advantage to the sense, which will then be, that Jehovah had exercised extraordinary mercy towards the Psalmist by bringing him into a position where he was as safe from the evils which he felt or feared as he would have been from mere corporeal perils in a walled town or a fortress.

23 (22.) And (yet it was) I (that) said in my terror, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Nevertheless, thou didst hear the voice of my prayers (for mercy) in my crying unto thee (for help.) The full force of the emphatic pronoun can be represented only by a paraphrase. The meaning is that this very person who experiences this wonderful protection was the same who, but a little while before, had given himself up for lost.—In my haste. The Hebrew word denotes the hurried flight cf one escaping panic-struck from his pursuers. See the literal application of the verb, in historical prose, to the case of David himself, 1 Sain, xxiii. 26, and compare Ps. xlviii. 6 (5.) civ. 7. Our idiom absolutely requires an adversative particle at the beginning of the second clause, although the Hebrew word is properly a particle of affirmation, meaning certainly or surely.    Notwithstanding 252 PSALM  XXXT. his despondency and unbelief, Jehovah heard and answered his prayers for mercy and his cries for help, both which ideas are suggested in the original.

<!-- PAGE 275 -->
24 (23.) Love Jehovah, ye his gracious ones (or favoured ones); faith-keeping (is) Jehovah, and repaying in plenty (the man) ivorking pride (or acting proudly?) In this and the remaining verse, he makes a further application of the truth, which he had just attested from his own experience, to the case of all God's saints or gracious ones, at once the subjects and the objects of benignant dispositions, those who are merciful because they obtain mercy (Matt. v. 7.) See above, on Ps. iv 4 (3.)—The next wTords admit of two interpretations : keeping (preserving) the faithful, and keeping faith, literally fidelities, the plural being often used in Hebrew as an abstract. The predominant usage of s^itea is in favour of this last construction. See above, on Ps. xii. 2 (1.) Keeping faith of course means with those who are faithful to himself, so that we still have the antithesis between them and the man doing, exercising pride, a form of speech much stronger than its English equivalent, acting proudly.—Abundantly, or literally, in plenty

25 (24.) Be stroiig, and let him confirm your heart, all ye that wait for Jehovah (or hope in him.) The idea and the form of expression are the same as in Ps. xxvii. 14, except that what the Psalmist there says to himself, or to his own soul, he here says to all that hope in God or wait for the fulfilment of his promises. See the same description of God's people in Ps. xxxiii. 18 below.—Be strong in purpose and desire, and he will make you strong in fact. This promise is conveyed undei the form of a wTish, may he strengthen (cr confirm) your he-art See above, on Ps. xxvii. 14.
