<!-- psalm 35 | vol 1 | scan pages 300-311 -->

<!-- PAGE 300 -->
PSALM   XXXY.

We have here another of those psalms, in which two great parties, the righteous and the wicked, are exhibited in contrast and in an attitude of mutual hostility. The psalm may b« divided into three parts, parallel to one another, in all of which the elements combined are complaint, prayer, and the promise of thanksgiving for anticipated deliverance. The first division is occupied with an invocation of divine judgments on God's enemies, ending with an expression of triumph in God's favour, vs. 1—9. The second contains a more particular description of these enemies, as oppressors, false accusers, unthankful Tenderers of evil for good, and malignant scoffers, with a prayer for the divine interposition, and a pledge of public thanksgiving, vs. 10—18. The third renews briefly the description of the enemy, but is chiefly filled with prayer to be delivered from them, and closes, like the others, with a promise of perpetual thanksgiving, vs. 19—28.

1. By David. Oppose, Jehovah, my opposers ; devour my devourers. The correctness of the title is confirmed by the appearance of allusion to 1 Sam. xxiv. 16 (15,) the incident recorded in which place may have been present to the Psalmist's mind, although we have no reason to believe that he wrote it with exclusive reference to that time or to himself, but for the use of pious sufferers in general.—Strive ivith my strivers, or contend with my contenders. The original verb is one specifically Used to denote judicial contest, litigation, in which sense a cog- 2TS PSALM   XXXV. nate noun is used below, v. 23, and the English Bible thus translates the verse before us : 'plead {my cause) with them that strive against me ; fight against them that fight against me. It is only in the passive form, however, that tnb means to fight; its primary sense is to devour. The application of this metaphor to warfare is not uncommon. See below, Ps. lvi. 2, 3 (1, 2), and compare Num. xiv. 9. xxiv. 8. Dent. vii. 16.

<!-- PAGE 301 -->
2. Lay hold of shield and buckler, and stand up in my defeyice (or for my help) The manifestation of God's saving and protecting power is described in Scripture under various figures corresponding to the form of the particular suffering or danger. Against injustice he appears as an advocate or judge (see v. 23 below) ; against violence as a warrior (see Deut. xxxii. 41, 42.) In this character the Psalmist here entreats him to appear, and for that end to seize, grasp, or lay hold of his weapons of defence. The shield and buckler seem to have been different in size (1 Kings x. 16, 17), though not in use.—Arise, address thyself to action. See above, on Ps. iii. 8 (7.)—In my help is by some explained to mean as my help i. e. my helper; but the Hebrew idiom seems to be identical with our phrase in my defence.

3. And draw out the spear, and stop (the way) against my pursuers ; say to my soul, Thy salvation (am) I. The first verb properly means empty, pour out, and then draio out. Some suppose the expression to be strictly applicable only to the sword, but to be here applied by a kind of poetic licence to the spear. Others suppose it to be strictly used, but in relation to the drawing of it out of its repository or concealment. Some explain lio as a foreign word, identical with the Scythian ouyctQiq or battle-axe. But no such word occurs in Hebrew elsewhere, and the meaning of the verb ^ao is entirely ap propriate, to close or  stop the way against another.    Against, or literally to meet,, in a hostile or military sense which the word has in Deut. i. 44, Josh. viii. 14, and elsewhere.— To my soul; see above, on Ps, xi 1.— Thy salvation, see below, Ps. xxxviii. 23 (22.)

<!-- PAGE 302 -->
4. Sha??ied and confounded be the seekers of my soul ; turned back and made to blush the devisers of my hurt. Entirely disappointed in their hopes and efforts. The optative meaning of the futures is determined by the unambiguous form ifih in v. 6 below. The seekers of my soul or life, i. e. such as seek it to destroy it. Compare Matt. ii. 13, 20. Turned back, disgracefully repulsed and defeated. See above, on Ps. ix. 18 (17.) Made to blush : the form of the verb in Hebrew is not causative, but simply means to blush or be confused. The causative form is here employed in order to give uniformity to the English sentence.—My hurt, literally, my evil, i. e. evil fortune, calamity, or injury.—Devisers, literally, thinkers, i. e. such as meditate or purpose my destruction

5. Let them be as chaff before a wind, and the angel of Jehovah smiting. Under the influence of inspiration, the Psalmist sees the natural and righteous consequences of their wickedness, and viewing the case merely in itself, apart from personal feeling, speaks of this effect as desirable. The wish expressed is, to all intents and purposes, equivalent to a prediction or the affirmation of a general truth. The Psalmist desires the destruction of these sinners precisely as God wills it; nor is it any harder to reconcile such wishes with the highest degree of human goodness than it is to reconcile the certain fact that God allows some men to perish with his infinite benevolence The figure of chaff before the wind suggests the idea of intrinsic worthlessness with that of easy and complete destruction. Compare Ps. i. 4. The participle at the close means striking (them)  down, so that they cannot rise.    Compare Ps. xxxvi

<!-- PAGE 303 -->
13 (12.)    The angel of Jehovah, his appointed instrument of vengeance.    See above, on Ps. xxxiv. 8 (7.)

6. Let their way be dark and slippery and the angel of Jehovah chasing them. The optative form of the verb at the beginning determines the sense of those which go before, and which otherwise might be ambiguous.—Dark and slippery, literally, darkness and smoothnesses, an emphatic substitution of the abstract for the concrete. The fearful image thus suggested of men driven, like chaff before the wind, along a dark and slippery path, is rendered more terrific by the additional idea of their being hotly pursued by the destroying angel. The construction of the last clause, both in this verse and the one before it, is : (let) the angel of Jehovah (be) pursuing them.

7. For without cause they hid for me their pitfall; without cause they digged for my soul. This verse assigns the reason of the imprecations or denunciations which precede.— Without cause, wantonly, gratuitously, unprovoked, and therefore prompted by mere malice. See below, v. 19.— The pit of their net is an idiomatic phrase like the hill of my holi?iess. See above, on Ps. ii. 6. The true sense of the phrase appears to be their net-pit, i. e. their pit covered with a net, a figure borrowed from the ancient modes of hunting. See above, on Ps. vii. 16 (15.) ix. 16 (15.) In the last clause we may either supply a relative, as in the common version, which they digged, or take the verb in the absolute sense of making a pit or ditch.

8. Let ruin come (upon) him (when) he does not know; ana his net which he hid—let it take him—with ruin (to his ruin) let him Jail into it. The first noun properly denotes a crash, as of a falling house, and then a ruin, both in the narrower and wider sense. "When he does not know, unawares, unexpectedly, as in Isai. xlvii. 11. Job ix. 5.    The last clause  may also be translated, into ruin let him fall into it, i. e. as the common version has it, into that very ruin.    But it  is simpler  to let HifciTDa qualify the verb; let him fall with ruin, i. e. ruinously, to his own destruction.

<!-- PAGE 304 -->
9. And my soul shall exult in Jehovah, shall joy in his salvation. Our idiom would require so or then at the beo-'mnino" of the sentence, to make the connexion of the verses clear.—In JeJiovah, not merely on account of him, but in union with him and possession of him, as the parallel phrase, in his salvation, means in the experience and enjoyment of it. This is a kind of promise that the favour asked shall not be unrequited by thanksgiving, and the same idea is still further carried out in the next verse.

10. All my bones shall say, Jehovah, who is like thee, delivering the sufferer from (one) stronger than himself, and the sufferer and the needy from his spoiler ? The bones, the frame, the person, are here put for the whole man. See above, on  Ps. xxxii. 3.     The   interrogative  form  implies  negation. * There is no such saviour besides God.'    The apparent tautology may be   relieved  in  English by translating even the sufferer, &c.    But such repetitions are entirely congenial to the Hebrew idiom.    With the second clause compare Jer. xxxi. 11 and with the third Ps. x. 2.

11. There rise up witnesses of violence; (as to) that which I have not known they ask me. The future verbs describe the acts as still in progress, and as likely to be long continued. They are rising or about to rise, asking or about to ask. The word translated violence is one of very frequent occurrence in the Psalms and includes the ideas of injustice and cruelty. See above, on Ps. vii. 17 (16.) xi. 5. xviii. £9 (48.) xxv. 19. xxvii. 12. * They endeavour to draw from me  the acknowledgment o/ crimes which I have not committed, and of which I have no knowledge.'

<!-- PAGE 305 -->
12. They repay one evil for good—bereavement to my souL •If given up to them, I have nothing to expect but a continued recompense of evil for good, extending even to the-loss of what is most essential to my being and well-being.' The word translated bereavement commonly means loss of children, but is here used metaphorically for the most extreme and lamentable destitution.

13. And I—in their sickness my clothing (was) sackcloth ; I humbled with fasting my soul—and my prayer into my bosom shall return. The general idea is that he displayed the deepest sympathy with their distresses. This idea is expressed by figures borrowed from the oriental mourning usages. Sackcloth, fasting, and prayer are here particularly mentioned. To humble the soul (or one's self) or as some explain it to mortify the appetite, is the phrase by which fasting is described in the Law of Moses (Lev. xvi. 31, xxiii, 27, 32. Num. xxix. 7), and which is here combined with the later word tP(2.—The last clause is obscure and is by some understood to signify the constancy of supplication, coming back and going out again without cessation. Others explain it as a mere description of the attitude of prayer with the head bowed upon the bosom, as if he had said, I was continually pouring prayer into my bosom. But neither of these explanations is so probable as the traditional one of the Jews, according to which he desires that the prayer which he offered for them might redound to his own advantage. Or the clause may be still more simply construed as a prediction : ' my prayer shall not be lost, it shall return in blessings to the heart which prompted it.'

14. As (if it had been) a friend, a brother to mc, I went on (or went about); as a mourner for a mother, squalid I bowed down. He not only mourned in their calamity, but with the deepest grief, as for a friend, a brother, or a parent, which terms are so arranged as to produce a beautiful and striking climax.— The verb in the first clause corresponds very nearly to the familiar English phrase went on, in the sense of lived or habitually acted. See above, on Ps. i. 1.—The Hebrew word "j^p means squalid, dirty, in allusion to the ancient oriental practice of neglecting the appearance, and even covering the dress and person with dust and ashes, as a token of extreme grief. The bowing down is also to be taker as a part of the same usage.

<!-- PAGE 306 -->
15. And (yet) in my limping they rejoiced, and were gathered together; there were gathered together against me cripples, a?id I did not know (it); they did tear and were not silent. With his behaviour to them in their affliction he contrasts theirs to him. As disease in general is a common figure for distress, so lameness in particular is so used here and in Ps. xxxviii. 18 (17.) Jer. xx. 10. They assembled not to comfort but to mock him and revile him.—The obscure word D^K) has been variously explained to mean smite-rs with the tongue (Jer. xviii. 18), i. e. slanderers—'whipped (Job xxx. 8), i. e. degraded criminals—and smitten (Isai. liii. 4), i. e. afflicted. But Luther's explanation, which connects the word with the cognate form tP:b:n VS\ (2 Sam. iv. 4. ix. 3) smitten in the feet, lame, crippled, not only yields a good sense, but agrees best with the figure of the first clause. ' When I limped cripples mocked at me '—i. e. those who were themselves con temptible treated me with contempt. 1 did not knoiv it. It was done behind my back, and while I was entirely unsuspicious. See above, on v. 8. This is a more natural construction than whom I did not knoiv, which is moreover inconsistent with what goes before—They rent or tore me by their slanders

<!-- PAGE 307 -->
16. With worthless mockers for bread—gnashing against me their teeth. This they did in the company of impious, reprobate, or worthless scoffers, who calumniate others for the sake of gaining favour with their wicked patrons. Hence they are called bread or cake-scoffers, those who earn their food by spiteful mockery of others. The form of the whole verse is extremely idiomatic and scarcely admits of an exact translation. The literal meaning of the first clause is with the worthless of mockers of bread, and in the second the verb gnash is an infinitive, which can only be rendered in intelligible English by a participle or a finite verb, they gnashed, or gnashing. This is always expressive of malignant rage and shows that what is here described is not mere raillery but spiteful defamation.

17. Lord, how long icilt thou look on7. Restore my soul from their ruins (or ruinous plots), from the young lions my lonely one. The first Hebrew word is not Jehovah but Adho?iai, properly expressive of dominion or sovereignty. See above, on Ps. xvi. 2—How long? The Hebrew phrase usually means hoiv much, but is here specially applied to time; how much time! how long? Wilt thou see what treatment I receive, and merely see it, as an indifferent spectator ?—Restore my soul has not the same sense as in Ps. xix. S (7). xxiii. 3, but the strict one of bringing back from the dangerous extreme to which he had been brought by the ruins or ruinous devices— i. e. designed to ruin others—of his enemies. Lions are mentioned as the strongest and fiercest of wild beasts, and young lions as the most active of their species. See above, on Ps. xxxiv. 11 (10.)—My lonely, solitary, soul. See above, on Ps. xxii. 21 (20.)

18. I will thank thee in the great assembly, in (the midst of the) mighty people I will praise thee. On the supposition that his prayer will be heard and answered, he engages to give public thanks, in the great congregation or assembly of God's people. See above, on Ps. xxii. 23, 26 (22, 25).—Strong peopie, strong in numbers, a poetical equivalent to great congregation.—The verb in the last clause means to praise in general; that in the first to praise for. benefits received, to acknowledge favours, in other words to thank.    See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 2.

<!-- PAGE 308 -->
19. Let them not rejoice respecting me, my enemies of falsehood, (and let not) my haters without cause ivink the eye. Respecting me, at my expense, or, in this and similar connexions, over me, although this idea is not so much expressed in the text as suggested by the context. See above, Ps. xxv. 2, and below, v. 24. Ps. xxxviii. 17 (16.) Let them not rejoice, let them have no occasion so to do.—My enemies of falsehood, my false enemies, who gratify their spite by calumny and slander.—My haters loithout cause, those who hate me gratuitously, out of sheer spite, without any reasonable ground or even colourable pretext. This is a favourite description of the enemies of the righteous—see above, on Ps. vii. 5 (4,) xxv. 3—and was pre-eminently true of the enemies of Christ, to whom it is applied in the New Testament (John xv. 25.) The negation of the first clause is to be repeated in the other, as in Ps. ix. 19 (18.) Winking is here referred to as a gesture of mutual congratulation among accomplices in guilt. Compare Prov. vi. 13. x. 10.

20. For not peace will they speak, and against the quiet of the land words of deceits will they devise. The for assigns a reason why they ought not to be suffered to rejoice in the success of their designs. The reason is, because their designs are evil, tending not to peace—in the strict sense, as opposed to strife, or in the wide sense, as opposed to trouble and calamity— but to the disturbance of those who are peacefully inclined, the quiet (or tranquil) of the land, i. e. the land of promise, cousidered as the home of God's chosen people, who, as its rightfu, proprietors, are characteristically peaceful and averse from all strife and disorder. Compare Matt. v. 5. To disturb these, the wicked devise words of deceits, in which phrase words is no«. an idiomatic pleonasm,—compare xli. 9 (8.) lxv. 4 (3),—but a substantive expression, meaning false (or lying) words, and more specifically slanders—see below, Ps. xxxvi. 4 (3)—the utterers of which are called lying enemies in v. 19. The futures of this verse include the present: they do so now and will do so still. Some connect not peace as an emphatic compound, meaning just the opposite of peace.    Compare Isai. x. 15.

<!-- PAGE 309 -->
21. And have widened against me their mouth ; they have said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen. ' They have mocked at my distress with contemptuous grimaces, and rejoiced in the fulfilment of their spiteful -wishes.' With the first clause compare Ps. xxii. 8 (7) above. The Hebrew interjection in the last clause (nan) seems to be a natural expression of joyful surprise. Their success was almost too great to be real, yet attested by their senses. The verse ends with a kind of aposiopesis : ' our own eyes have seen'—what we could not have believed on the report of another, to wit, the gratification of our warmest wishes.    See below, v. 25.

22. Thou hast seen, Jehovah, be not silent ; Lord be not fat from me. * But they are not the only witnesses of my distress for thou, Lord, likewise seest and hast long seen it. Seeing it. therefore, be no longer silent; refrain no longer from interposing in my favour; speak in my behalf; be uear me in this time of peril.' The connexion of the verses is like that in Ps. x. 13, 14, and the prayer in the last clause not unlike that with which the same psalm opens. With the other petition be not silent, compare that at the beginning of P^». xxviii, and with the first words, thou hast seen, those of v. 17 above

<!-- PAGE 310 -->
23. Arouse (thee) and awake for my right {pi judgment) my God and my Lord for my cause. ' Put an end to this inaction and apparent indifference, and manifest thy presence, as my sovereign and my covenant keeping God, for the vindication of my innocence against false accusers and unrighteous judges.' The same petition, clothed in nearly the same words, occurs above in Ps. vii. 7, 9 (6, 8).    See also Ps. ix. 5 (4.) xvii.

24. Judge me according to thy righteousness, Jehovah, my God, and let them not rejoice respecting me. 'Do me justice, clear me from aspersion, grant an attestation of my innocence, in the exercise and exhibition of thine own essential rectitude, and in accordance with that covenant relation which exists between us; and thus, in the most effectual manner, take away from my malignant enemies all pretext and occasion for exulting in my overthrow, or otherwise triumphing at my expense.' With the last clause compare Ps. xxx. 2 (1) above, where he thanks God for the very favour which he here asks. The verb in this clause may be referred to men in general, or with still greater probability to the enemies described in the preceding context.

25. Let them not say in their heart, Aha, our soul (or our heart's desire)! Let them not say, We have sivalloived him up! In their heart, not secretly, but cordially, not as opposed to saying so to others, but to mere profession.—Our heart's desire! an abbreviated exclamation prompted by strong feelino-. * This is precisely what we have so long and so intensely wished for !' See above, on Ps. xxvii. 12. Let them not say, let them not have occasion so to say ; let not the events which befall me justify them in so saying.—Sivalloived him up, utterly destroyed him. See above, on Ps. xxi. 10 (9), and compare Lam. n. 16, where the form of expression is no doubt copied from the verse before us.

<!-- PAGE 311 -->
2C. Let them be ashamed and blush together—the rejoicers in my evil; let them put on shame and contempt the (men) magnifying against me (their words, or their deeds, or themselves) ! The relative construction, ivho rejoice in my hurt. who magnify against me, gives the sense, but in an English rather than a Hebrew form.—Ashamed, disappointed and defeated. See above, on v. 4.—Blush, be confused or confounded.—My evil, i. e. evil fortune, injury, including the idea of injustice, as the antithetical term in v. 27, is righteousness or justification.—Put on, as a dress, and wear it, or be covered with it. See below, on Ps. cix. 18 (17), and compare Job. viii. 22.—Contempt, disgrace, ignominy.—Making great, &c. their mouth or words, i. e. speaking proudly, Ob. 12. Ezek. xxxv. 13 ; or still more probably and agreeably to usage, acting proudly, as in Ps. lv. 13 (12), and elsewhere. The complete expression may be that used in Joel ii. 20.

27. Let them shout (or sing) and rejoice—the desirers oj my righteousness—and let them always say, Great is (or be) Jehovah, the (God) willing (or desiri?ig) the peace of his servant! The sentence may be brought into closer conformity to our idiom by adopting a relative construction. ' Let them rejoice who desire my righteousness,' i. e. my justification, who desire to see me practically justified by God's providential dealings with me.—Let them always say, i. e. always have occasion so to do, which is virtually wishing that the peace or prosperity of Jehovah's servant may be perpetual. The verbal adjective in both these clauses means desiring, with a strong implication of complacency or satisfaction in the object, and therefore really includes the two ideas of desire and delight.— The righteousness or justification of the first clause is an obvious antithesis to the evil, hurt, or injury of v. 26, and no lese obviously identical, or at least coincident, with the peace oi welfare of the last clause here
