<!-- psalm 43 | vol 1 | scan pages 385-389 -->

<!-- PAGE 385 -->
A sufferer prays to be delivered from unjust and treacherous enemies, vs. 1—3, expresses a confident assurance that his request will be granted, v. 4, and upbraids himself for hit despondency and unbelief, v. 5.

As the last verse is identical with that of tli3 preceding psalm, and the last clause of v. 2 nearly so with that of Ps. xlii

<!-- PAGE 386 -->
10 (9), some have inferred that this is really the third stanza or strophe of that psalm, separated from it by mistake. But the difficulty of accounting for such a mistake, a difficulty aggravated by the resemblance of the compositions, together with a very perceptible difference in the general tone of the two psalms, makes it far more probable that it is a supplementary psalm, composed by the same person, or in imitation of him, on a different occasion. The union of the two in more than thirty Hebrew manuscripts, only shows that their transcribers drew the same hasty conclusion that has since been drawn by many interpreters, and is much more easily explained than the division of the psalms in all the other copies, on the contrary hypothesis. Their juxtaposition in the Psalter is owing not merely to their mutual resemblance, but to the fact that one was actually written as an appendix or continuation of the other. The same hypothesis sufficiently accounts for the absence of a title or inscription in the psalm before us.

1. Judge me (oh) God, i. e. do me justice, vindicate my innocence, exercise thy righteousness in my behalf. See above, on Ps. x. 18. xxvi. 1. And plead my cause, literally, strive my strife, but with particular allusion to litigious or forensic contest. See above, on Ps. xxxv. 1. Against an ungodly nation, literally, from one ; the idea of deliverance, as the necessary consequence of God's being his advocate, is here implied, and afterward expressed. The word nations (ti^ia) being constantly applied to the gentiles or heathen, the use of the singular in reference to Israel always conveys an idea of reproach. Compare Isai. i. 4. Ungodly, more exactly, not merciful, the Hebrew word denoting both the object and the sub« ject of benignant pity. See above, on Ps. xxxvii. 28. From a man of fraud. See above, on Ps. v. 7 (6.) And iniquity, or more precisely, perverseness, moral obliquity.     Thou ivilt deliver me.    This is strictly an expression of strong confidence, but really includes the prayer, deliver thou me.

<!-- PAGE 387 -->
2. For thou art the God of my strength. The last word means properly my 'place of strength, my stronghold, or my fortress. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 1. For what {cause) hast thou cast me off, renounced, rejected me? The original expression is a very strong one, and implies disgust or loathing. Compare Rev. iii. 16. (Why) do I go, or more exactly, shall I, must I go, i. e. go about, in different directions. The verb is an intensive form of that used in Ps. xlii. 10 (9), and occurs above, in Ps. xxxv. 14, in the same connexion as here. Mourning, with special reference to the neglect of neatness, both in dress and person, as a customary sign of grief. See above, on Ps. xxxv. 14. xxxviii. 7 (6.) xlii. 10 (9.) In (i. e. during and because of) the oppression (persecution) of the enemy. All this is indirectly represented as inconsistent with the covenant relation he sustains to God.

3. Send, i. e. send forth or out from thy presence. See above, on Ps. xiv. 7. xx. 3 (2.) Thy light, the light of thy countenance, thy favourable aspect, as in Ps. iv. 7 (G), or more generally, light, as the opposite of darkness, and a figure for relief from that of which darkness is the emblem, to wit, danger and distress. And thy truth, thy veracity, thy faithfulness, the certain fulfilment of thy promises. See above, on Ps. xxv. 5. xxvi. 3. xxx. 10 (9.) To send it out is to exercise this attribute, to manifest it in act, by performing his engagements. They, with emphasis on the pronoun, which is otherwise superfluous in Hebrew, they and no other, nothing else. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 4. Shall guide (conduct or lead) me, or giving the future an optative meaning, which is certainly implied in this connexion, let them lead me. They shall cause me to come (or let them bri?ig me) to thy hill of holiness (thy ho*y PSALM   XLIII. 3C5 hill) and to thy dwellings, or thy tabernacles, as the Hebrew word is specially applied to the Mosaic sanctuary (Ex. xxv. 9. Num. i. 50.) This petition seems to imply a previous exclu* Bion from it, and thereby shows that the historical occasion of the psalm, if not the same, was similar to that of the forty* second. The form of expression seems to be borrowed from Ex. xv. 13. The mention of the tabernacle and the holy hill, i. e. Mount Zion, shows that the psalm is neither earlier nor later than the times of David and Solomon, before whom there was no holy hill, and after whom there was no tabernacle. This strengthens the presumption that David was himself the author of both psalms.

<!-- PAGE 388 -->
4. And I shall come, as an expression of strong confidence that God will save him from his present troubles, or / will come, as the expression of a purpose, amounting to a vow or solemn promise. Both these ideas, though requiring a slight variation of expression in our idiom, would be necessarily suggested to a Hebrew reader by the original verb, the paragogic form of which, however, shows that the second is the primary idea. See above, on Ps. xlii. 5 (4.) To the altar of God (Elohim), as the place of sacrifice, here put for the whole sanctuary. To God {El) the gladness of my joy, my joyour gladness, the author and the object of my highest exultation. And I will thank thee, praise thee for thy benefits, with a harp piSS), the instrument on which David's history describes him as excelling. See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 2, and compare 1 Sam. xvi. 16, 23. What he here vows is not mere private praise, but participation in the public praises of the sanctuary. God, my God. Not merely God in general, but my God in particular. Either expression by itself would have been insufficient to express the whole idea, God being too vague, my God too restricted, whereas the combination of the two implies that his God was not a personal, domestic, or national divinity, but the supreme God,

<!-- PAGE 389 -->
5. Why art thou cast down, literally, ivhy wilt thou deject thyself, implying self-rebuke for an unreasonable and untimely sadness. (Oh) my soul, which is really equivalent to myself. And why art thou disquieted, why wilt thou be agitated by these anxious doubts and groundless fears ? See above, on Ps. xlii. 6 (5.) Within me, literally, upon me, as if his unbelieving fears weighed upon him as a heavy burden. Hope thou in God, or more exactly, wait thou for him, for his appearance, for his help, for the fulfilment of his promise. This, he is confident, will come at last. For I shall yet praise him, thank him, or acknowledge his kindness. (As) the health of my countenance, or more exactly, the salvations of my face, the salvations which are yet to cheer my clouded aspect and lift up my dejected countenance. The exact coincidence of this verse with the last of the preceding psalm, so far from proving it to be a part of it, rather proves the contrary, for reasons which have been already stated in the exposition of Ps. xlii. 12(11.)
