<!-- psalm 44 | vol 1 | scan pages 389-399 -->

<!-- PAGE 389 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. To the Sons of Korah. Mas* chil. The same question here arises as in Ps. xlii, as to the sense in which the psalm is ascribed to the sons of Koran. For the reasons there assigned, it is, on the whole, most probable that David is the author, however difficult it may be to account for the omission of his name in the inscription, and the appearance of the sons of Koran in the place which it usually occupies. See above, on Ps. xlii. 1. The addition of Maschil, , i. e. a didactic psalm, is meant to show that though occasioned by a particular event, perhaps the same as in Ps. lx, it was composed and left on record for the permanent use and edification of God's people. See above, on Ps. xxxii. 1. The train of thought is marked with unusual distinctness. God was, in ancient times, the protector and deliverer of Israel, vs. 2—5 (I—4.) He is still their national and covenanted God, vs. 6—10 (5—9.) But he seems to have given them up to their enemies, vs. 11—18 (10—17.) Yet Israel still cleaves to him and suffers for his sake, vs. 19—23 (18—22.) He is therefore importuned to reappear for their deliverance, vs. 24—27 (23—26.) The state of things described and the sentiments expressed in this psalm, do not afford the slightest reason for referring it to any later period than that of David, when the same occasions of complaint and importunity were in existence, although not to so great an extent as afterwards.

<!-- PAGE 390 -->
2 (1.) Oh God, with our ears have we heard, our fathers have recounted to us, the work thou didst work in their days, in the days of old. What they had heard with their ears is tacitly contrasted with the very different things which they had seen with their eyes. See below, Ps. xlviii. 9 (8), and compare Judg. vi. 13. 2 Chron. xx. 7. Hab. iii. 2. Our fathers have told us, as enjoined or predicted in Ex. x. 2. The verb means properly to count, and then to recount or relate, with particular reference to the detailed enumeration of particulars. See above, on Ps. ii. 7. The last clause may be construed as a separateproposition. A work thou didst ivork, etc. But this leaves the active verbs of the first clause without a grammatical object. The emphatic combination of the verb and its derivative noun is greatly weakened in the English Bible, what icorkthou didst, and still more in   the Prayer Book version, what thou hast done. The particular work meant, as appears from what follows, is the conquest of Canaan and the settlement of Israel in it.

<!-- PAGE 391 -->
3 (2.) Thou (with) thy hand didst nations dispossess and plant them, didst crush peoples and extend them. This, though a literal translation, is obscure in English, because the pronoun them in both clauses refers to Israel. In the second clause it might indeed have reference to the Canaanites, and the verb be taken in the sense of sending out, expelling, as in Gen. iii. 23. 1 Kings ix. 7. Isai. 1.1. But as it is also used to signify the sending out of shoots or branches by a tree or vine, Ps. lxxx. 12 (11.) Jer. xvii. 8. Ezek. xvii. 6, 7. xxxi. 5, the parallelism seems decisive in favour of that meaning here. The verb translated dispossess means properly to cause to inherit, but is sometimes applied to the substitution of one heir or possessor for another. See Ex. xxxiv. 24. Num. xxxii. 21. xxxiii. 52. Deut. iv. 38. The verb translated crush may simply mean to injure; but the> stronger sense is here entitled to the preference.

4 (3.) For not with their sword did they possess the land, and their (own) arm did not save them ; for (it was) thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light of thy counteyiance; for thou didst favour them. The for at the beginning introduces the proof or amplification of the general statement in the preceding verse, that it was God who planted and settled them. Save them, literally to or for them, i. e. did not bring deliverance to them, or work out deliverance for them. The translation of the second ^ by but gives the sense but not the form of the original, as the use of the particle, in its strict sense, jus* before and after, forbids our taking the intermediate one in any other. With the first clause compare Josh. xxiv. 12; with Uie last clause Ps. iv. 7 (6.)

<!-- PAGE 392 -->
5 (4.) Thou art He, my King, (oh) God! Command deliverances for Jacob. The form of expression in the first clause is highly idiomatic and somewhat obscure. It may either mean, 1 thou who hast done all this art still my king,' or ' thou art he who is my king,' which last may be thus resolved into the English idiom, ' it is thou who art my king.' Compare 2 Sam. vii. 28. 1 Chron. xxi. 17. The church here claims the same relation to Jehovah that was sustained by the former generations of his people. The last clause may also be translated, order the salvations of Jacob, i. e. cause them to take place and regulate them by thy providence. The personal name of the patriarch is poetically substituted for his official title as the father of the chosen people.    See above, on Ps. xxiv. 6.

6 (5.) In thee our adversaries will ice push; in thy name will ice trample our assailants. The hopes of Israel still rely upon that power which expelled the Canaanites. The word translated adversaries properly means those who press, oppress, or persecute. See above, on Ps. iii. 2 (1), and compare Ps. xiii. 5 (4). xxvii. 2, 12. Our assailants, literally, our risers up, those rising up against us. See above, on Ps. xviii. 40 (39), and compare Deut. xxxiii. 11. The verb in the first clause means specifically to push with the horns, to toss, or gore. See Ex. xxi. 28—32, and compare Deut. xxxiii. 17. 1 Kings xxii. 11. In thy name, not merely by thy authority, or as thy representatives, but in thyself, in union and communion with thee. See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) xviii. 30 (29.) The meaning of the future verbs in this connexion is, that they will triumph, if at all, in this way.    They must prevail thus or be vanquished.

7 (6.) For not in my bow will I trust, and my sword will (or can) not save me. * What was true of my fathers is equally true of me. As they did not prevail bj their own strength, neither can I hope to prevail by mine.'

<!-- PAGE 393 -->
8 (7.) In God have we praised all the day, and thy name unto eterniiy ivill we acknowledge. Selah. The construction in the first clause, although foreign from our idiom, is mora ex pressive than the simple phrase, we have praised God. It names God first, as the object in which the occasion and the theme of praise had been sought and found. 'It is in God that we find the subject of our praises.' The common version (boasted) confounds the verb here used with another derivative of the same root. Thy name, thy manifested nature. See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) To eternity or perpetuity, forever. All the day (long), i. e. always. See above, on Ps. xxv. 5. xlii. 11 (10.) Acknowledge, i. e. gratefully, give thanks. See above, on Ps. vi. 6(5.)

9 (8.) For thou hast saved us from our adversaries, and our haters (or those haling us) hast shamed. The preterites in this verse are explanatory of the futures in the one before it ' We will not rely upon ourselves hereafter, because it is thou who hast helped us heretofore.' This logical relation of the verses is destroyed by confounding the preterites and futures with each other, or explaining both as presents. Shamed, i. e. defeated, disappointed.   See above, on Ps. vi. 11 (10.) xiv. 6.

10 (9.) Nay, thou hast rejected and disgraced us, and thou wilt not go forth with our hosts. The particle at the beginning (jr]tt) implies something more than a negation of the favours just described. ' But now thou dost not so deal with us; nay more, thou hast rejected us.' This Hebrew verb implies disgust and abhorrence. See above, on Ps. xliii. 2. The other verb means to put to shame, to cover with disgrace, as in Ps. xxxv. 4. xl. 15 (14.) The past tense of the first verbs implies that the rejection was already manifest; the future following implies an apprehension that it would continue. Go out with our hosts, as a guide, a commander, and an ally.    Compare 2 Sam. v. 24.

<!-- PAGE 394 -->
11 (10.) Thou wilt make us turn back from the adversary, and (already) those hating us have plundered for them, i. e for themselves. Two of the most unwelcome incidents of warfare are here specified, flight and spoliation. Svoiled for them' selves, not merely for their own advantage, but at their own will and discretion.    Compare 1 Sam. xiv. 48. xxiii. 1.

12 (11.) Thou wilt give us as sheep (for) food, and among the nations hast scattered us. The consecution of the tenses is the same as in the preceding verse. Sheep for food, or flocks of food, i. e. intended and accustomed to be eaten. Give may either mean place, render, constitute, or give up, abandon. The last clause has by some been understood to refer to the Babylonish exile, and regarded as a proof of later date. But in every war with the surrounding countries, there were partial deportations and dispersions. See Joel iv. 2. Am. i. 6, 9, an«l compare 1 Kings viii. 46.

13 (12.) Thou wilt sell thy people without gain, and hast not increased by their price. They seemed to be gratuitously given up, i. e. without necessity or profit. Without gain, literally wealth or riches, as a product or equivalent. The same noun may be repeated in the next clause, thou hast not increased (thy tvealth), just as the verb gain is absolutely used in English. Their price, literally their prices, perhaps with reference to the individual captives, or to repeated sales of the kind here mentioned. Another possible tout far less natural construction treats the preposition as a mere connective and reads, thou hast not enhanced their price, i. e. set a high price upon them, implying that he had, on the contrary, sold them for too little, or rather given them away for nothing.    Compare Jer. xv. 13-

14 (13.) Thou wilt make us a reproach to our neighbours, a scoff" and a Jest to those around us.    If this state of things continues, such will be the necessary issue. Make us, b'orall) place us, set us up, expose us. See above, on Ps. xxxix 9 (8), and with the whole verse compare Ps. Ixxix. 4. lxxxix. 42 (41.)

<!-- PAGE 395 -->
15 (14.) Thou ivilt make us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples. A byword, literally a likeness or comparison, a case that may be cited as a memorable instance or example. The expression is borrowed from Deut. xxviii. 37. A shaking of the head, i. e. an object at which men will shake their heads, as an expression of contemptuous pity.    See above, on Ps. xxii. 8 (7.)

16 (15.) All the day my disgrace is before me, and shame my face has covered. It is before me so that I cannot fail to see it Ox lose sight of it. See above, Ps. xxxviii. 18 (17.) Shame is here represented as a covering, as in Jer. iii. 25, but perhaps with special reference to the suffusion of the face with blushes, as in Ps. lxix. 8 (7.)

17 (1G.) From the voice of slanderer and reviler, from the face of enemy and avenger. The preposition indicates the source or the occasion of the shame described in the preceding verse. Face may here mean either presence or the expression of the countenance. The last word is properly a participle and means taking vengeance or avenging one's self. Here, as in Ps. viii. 3 (2), it denotes a spiteful and revengeful enemy.

18 (17.) All this has come upon us, and we have not forgotten thee, and have not been false to thy covenant. With the first clause compare Judg. vi. 13. Come upon us: the construction is the same as in Ps. xxxv. 8. We have not been false, or acted falsely. The same verb with the same preposition, in Lev. xix. 11, has the sense of lying, or acting fraudulently, towards another.    See also Ps  lxxxix. 34 (33.)    What is here professed is not entire exemption from all acts of infidelity, but freedom from the deadly sin of total oblivion and apostasy. In spite of his unfaithfulness, Israel still claimed to be and was the chosen people of Jehovah.

<!-- PAGE 396 -->
19 (18.) Our heart has not turned back and our steps declined from thy path. The force of the negative extends to both clauses, as in Ps. ix. 19 (18.) Heart and steps are put for inward affection and its fruit, external action. Turned back and turned aside are natural and common figures for moral delinquency.     Thy path, the way of thy commandments.

20 (19.) That thou hast crushed us in a place of dragons, and hast covered over us with deathshade. The construction js continued from the preceding sentence. The connexion may be thus made plain in our idiom. ■ We have been guilty of no such infidelity or total apostasy, that thou shouldest deal with us in this way.' Crushed, bruised, or broken in pieces. See above, on Ps. x. 10, and below on Ps. li. 10 (8.) Dragons may here be understood as meaning wild beasts or lonely animals in general. Whether the Hebrew word specifically signifies wild-cats, wolves, or jackals, is a question of little exegetical importance. The essential meaning of the whole phrase is a place inhabited by lonely creatures, i. e. a wilderness or desert. Compare Isai. xiii. 22. xxxiv. 13. xliii. 20. Jer. ix. 10(11.) x. 22. xlix. 33. Ps. Ixiii. 11 (10.) Covered over, i. e. covered up, completely covered, a stronger expression than the simple verb. Deathshade, or the shadow of death, a strong poetical expression for the profoundest darkness. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 4.

21 (20.) If ice have forgotten the name of our God, and spread our hands to a strange God. Some regard this as the common eMiptical formula of swearing.    '(God do so to us and *4 PSALM  XLIV. more also) if we have forgotten/ which is equivalent to saying, 1 we have not forgotten.' Another method of supplying the ellipsis is exemplified in Jos. xxii 22. But since the verse, conditionally understood, yields a good sense in connexion with the next verse, this, as being the more obvious construction, is entitled \o the preference. The act of holding up or stretching out the hands is often mentioned as a natural gesture of entreaty See Ex. ix. 29, 33. 1 Kings viii. 38. Isai. i. 15. The word God in the version represents two different divine names in Hebrew, Elohim and El. See above, on Ps. xliii. 4. A strange God, or a God (who is) a stranger, i. e. to Jehovah and his people. The Hebrew word is applied by Moses both to men (Ex. xxx. 33) and idols (Deut. xxxii. 16.)

<!-- PAGE 397 -->
22 (21.) Shall not God search this out? For he knoweth the secrets of the heart. This is the apodosis of the sentence begun in the preceding verse. ' If we have done thus, must not God know it V The primary meaning of the verb translated search out is to dig, to bring to light what is hidden under ground. Thence, by a natural transition, it denotes the investigation and disclosure of all secrets. The interrogation is an indirect but strong affirmation of the fact in question. The for, at the beginning of the last clause, does not indicate the reason of the question, but of the affirmative answer which is tacitly implied. He (is) knowing, a form of expression which denotes continued and habitual knowledge. See above, on Ps. i. 6, and with the sentiment compare that of Ps. vii. 10 (9.)

23 (22.) Because for thee have we been killed all the day, we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter. The causal particle at the beginning does not refer to what immediately precedes but to the remoter context, and adduces a proof of the assertion, that the church had not forgotten or forsaken God. This proof is afforded by the fact, that their very sufferings were on his account. For thee, for thy sake, literally, on thee, on (account of) thee, on thy account. The preterite form, we have been killed, includes the present, we are killed, but with the additional idea, that the sufferings in question were not new or altogether recent, but had long been experienced. Reckoned, counted, estimated, i. e. by our enemies, who set no higher value on our lives than on those of sheep for the slaughter, literally, a flock of slaughter, i. e. one destined or accustomed to be slaughtered. This expression corresponds exactly to sheep for food, ox flock of food, in v. 12 (11) above. The whole verse is a strong poetical description of severe persecution or distress arising from the spite of enemies, and as such is applied by Paul to the sufferings of the church of Christ, in which the ancient Israel continues to exist. See Rom. viii. 36.

<!-- PAGE 398 -->
24 (23.) Arouse thee! Why wilt thou sleep, oh Lord. Awake, do not cast off forever. This bold apostrophe implies strong faith as well as warm affection. Such an address would not be made to an- inanimate object or an imaginary being. The idea is the same as in Ps. iii. 8 (7), to wit, that the with, holding of God's help or of his sensible presence may be figuratively described as a state of inaction or of sleep, from which he awakes and arises when he once more manifests his presence and affords his aid. Compare Ps. cxxi. 4. Matt. viii. 25. The verse is therefore really nothing more than an importunate petition for divine assistance. Cast off, reject with loathing and contempt, the same strong expression that occurs in v. 10 (9) above. Forever, literally, to perpetuity. The Hebrew phrase is not the same, however, that occurs in v. 9 (8) above.

25 (24.) Why ivilt thou hide thy face, ivilt thou forget our suffering and our persecution (or oppression) ? The same thing which had just been represented by the figure of sleep is here described as a refusal to see and to remember.   Both fisrurea are employed in Ps. xiii. 2 (1) above, in reference to precisely the same subject. These anthropomorphisms, which would be unlawful |n an uninspired writer, are perfectly intelligible and exceedingly expressive. The word translated suffering (or affliction) is generic and includes all forms of physical evil, one of which is then specified, to wit, the suffering caused by powerful and spiteful enemies. The same word denotes oppression or persecution at the hand of wicked men, in Ps. xlii. 10 (9.) xliii. 2. Why wilt thou forget is evidently more than why dost thou forget, for it conveys the additional idea, 'why wilt thou persist in doing as thou hast done heretofore and art doing now ?'

<!-- PAGE 399 -->
26 (25.) For boived (or sunk) to the dust is our soul, fixed to the earth is our belly. Both Hebrew verbs are active and . terally mean, our soul has bowed down, our belly has adhered. Belly may either have the sense of body, as opposed to sou*, as in Ps. xxxi. 10 (9) above, or be taken in its proper sense, in which case the whole clause is descriptive of the deepest degradation, a grovelling on the earth without the capacity or wish to rise, a state like that of the lowest reptiles, or the one denounced upon the serpent in Gen. iii. 14. "Whatever the image here presented may be, it is evidently meant to represent a state of deep depression and debasement.

27 (26.) Rise, a help for us, and redeem us for the salcc of thy mercy! This is the conclusion of his arguments and the sum of his petitions. Arise, from this state of apparent inaction, and exert thy power. Not merely for our help, as in Ps. xxxviii. 23(22,) but as our help, thou who art thyself our help, its source, its author, a much stronger expression than our helper, though essentially synonymous. See above, Ps. xl. 18 (17), and below, Ps. lxiii. 8 (7.)    Because of thy mercy, as a ground
