<!-- psalm 47 | vol 1 | scan pages 422-425 -->

<!-- PAGE 422 -->
exalted in the nations, I will be exalted in the earth. These words are addressed to the discomfited foes of Jehovah and his people. ■ Cease from your vain attacks upon my people; learn from what you have already seen and felt that their protector is divine, and that he is resolved to be acknowledged as supreme, not only by his chosen people, but by all the nations and throughout the earth.' This general recognition of Jehovah as the true and the supreme God, would of course be promoted by such a signal overthrow as that experienced by Sennacherib.    Compare Isai. xxxvii. 20.

12 (11.) Jehovah of Hosts (is) with us; a refuge for us (is) the God of Jacob. Selah. This repetition of the burden or refrain in v. 8 (7), brings us back not only to the close of the second stanza, but to the beginning of the first, where the same idea is expressed in other words. PSALM   XL VII.

1. To the Chief Musician. To the So?is of Korah. A Psalm. A song of triumph, in celebration of a signal victory gained by the chosen people over certain confederated nations. In the first stanza, vs. 2—5 (1—4), Jehovah is celebrated as the conqueror of the nations; in the second, vs. 6—10 (5—9), as their rightful sovereign; in both, as the tutelary God of Israel. Another difference of form between the two parts seems to be, that in the first, the exhortation to praise God is address, ed directly to the Gentiles; in the second, to Israel or the ancient church. The psalm has every appearance of having bee composed in reference to some particular event; but as this ii not indicated in the psalm itself, it can only be conjectured. Of the various suppositions which have been suggested the most probable is, that it was written to commemorate the victory of Jehoshaphat over the Ammonites and Edomites, recorded in the twentieth chapter of Second Chronicles. Besides the general appropriateness of the composition to the juncture there described, it is, to say the least, a very singular coincidence, that the history records the presence, upon that occasion, not only of Levites in general, but of the Korhites (sons of Korah) in particular (2 Chr. xx. 19.) We read too that singers went before the army (v. 21), and that on the fourth day they assembled in a valley which they called Berachah (blessing), because there they blessed the Lord (v. 26.) There is also something in the simple, animated, flowing style of the psalm before us, which agrees very well with the supposition of its being an inspired impromptu, a psalm composed upon the spur of the occasion, either by some anonymous prophet who accompanied the army, or by the Sons of Korah themselves. See above, on Vs. xlii. 1. This conjecture, as to the historical occasion of the psalm before us, is corroborated by the apparent relation of the next psalm to the same event.    See below, on Ps. xlviii. 1.

<!-- PAGE 423 -->
2 (1.) All nations, clap the hand! shout unto God with a voice of triumph ! The clapping of the hands is a natural gesture both of triumph and applause. See Nah. iii. 19, and compare Ps. xcviii. 8. Isai. lv. 12. The last word in the verse does not denote a feeling, but the audible expression of joy and exultation, by song or shout. See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) The nations addressed are not the particular nations .which had just been conquered, but the whole gentile world, the nations collectively, who are summoned to rejoice in the proof just afforded, that  Jehovah  is  their  rightful  sovereign.    See above, on Ps. iviii. 50 (49); and below, on Ps. lxvi. 4 (3.) cxvii. 1, and compare the original expression upon which this is modelled, Deut. xzxii. 43.

<!-- PAGE 424 -->
3 (2.) For Jehovah, Most High, is terrible, a great king over all the earth. He is not, as the heathen were disposed to imagine, a mere local deity, the God of the Hebrews only, but the God of the whole earth, the Universal Sovereign, and an object of fear to its inhabitants. See the same epithet applied to him in Ps. lxviii. 36 (35.)

4 (3.) He ivill subdue nations under us, and peoples wider our feet. This is,a proof both of his covenant relation to his people, and of his sovereign power over other nations. What he has done is but an earnest of what he will do. Compare Ps. xviii. 39 (38.) 48 (47.) This, though not a matter of rejoicing to the nations immediately concerned, may well be represented as a matter of rejoicing to the world at large, because it involves a promise that the Gentiles shall one day be included among the subjects of this divine protector and partakers of his favour

5 (4.) He ivill choose for us our heritage, the pride of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. By defeating the enemies who sought to expell Israel from the land of promise (2 Chr. xx. 11), God might be poetically said to settle them again therein, and, as at first, to choose their inheritance for them. The pride of Jacob, that of which he is proud, in which he glories, whether this be understood specifically of the Holy Land, or generically of all the privileges and distinctions which belonged to them as the peculiar people of Jehovah. Pride, exaltation, or distinction, as in Nan. ii. 3 (2.) Am. vi. 8. In Am. viii. 7, God himself is so described. Jacob, as in Ps. xxiv. 6. xlvi. 8 (7,) 12 (11.) Whom he loved.    See Mai. i. 2, and compare Ps. lxxviii. 68.

<!-- PAGE 425 -->
6 (5.) God has gone up with shouting, Jehovah with sound of trumpet. He is here described as returning to heaven after the conquest of his enemies and the rescue of his people, as in Ps. vii. 8 (7) he does the same, after sitting in judgment on the nations, and asserting the right of his own people. See Ps. lxviii. 19 (18), and compare Gen. xvii. 22. Judg. xiii. 20. The shouting and sound of the trumpet represent the ascension as a public and triumphant one. The ideal scene is typical of the actual ascension of our Saviour. See below, on Ps. lxviii. 19 (18.)

7 (6.) Sing praises (to) God, sing praises/ Sing praises to our King, sing praises? The Hebrew, corresponding to sing praises is a single word (l^at) which means to praise musically, both with voice and instrument. See above, on Ps. ix. 3 (2.) God, who is first mentioned as the object of the praise, is then described as our King, the actual King of Israel and the rightful King of all the earth.

8 (7.) For King of all the earth (is) God. Perform a maschil, i. e. sing and play a didactic psalm. See above, on Ps. xxxii. 1. xlii. 1. xliv. 1. xlv. 1. The maschil here meant is the psalm itself. The designation may have been omitted in the title for the very reason that it is contained in the body of the composition. The doctrine taught is that of Jehovah's universal sovereignty, and of the ultimate subjection of all nations to his peaceful sway. This idea is realized in the reigu of the Messiah, so that the psalm is, in a wide sense, Messianic. The peculiar import of this last clause is lost in the common version (si?ig ye praises with understanding), which is also that of the Septuagint ((//(Uare owsjibg), the Vulgate (psallite sapicnter), and Jerome (canite erudite.)

9 (8.) God hath reigned over the Tuitions, God hath sat dmtm
