<!-- psalm 49 | vol 1 | scan pages 433-447 -->

<!-- PAGE 433 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. To the So?is of Korah. A Psalm. This psalm, like the thirty-seventh, is intended tc console the righteous under the trials arising from the prosperity and enmity of wicked men, by showing these to be but temporary, and by the prospect of a speedy change in the relative position of the parties. It consists of a short introductory stanza, inviting general attention to the subject, vs. 2—5 (1—4), ollowed by two longer stanzas, the close of which is marked by the recurrence of a burden or refrain in vs. 13 (12) and 21 (20.) In the first of these two divisions, the prominent idea is the fallacy of all merely secular advantages and hopes, vs. 6—13 (5—12.) In the other, these advantages and hopes are directly contrasted with those of the believer, vs. 14—21 (13—20.) There is nothing in the psalm to determine its date or historical occasion. The inscription to the So?is of Korah is consistent with any date from the time of David to that of Ezra. S*±e above, on Ps. xlii. 1. xliv. 1. xlv. 1. x'vi. 1. xlvii. 1. xlviii 1. in favour of an earlier date however may be urged the obscurity and difficulty of the style.

<!-- PAGE 434 -->
2(1.) Hear this, all the natio?is ; give ear, all inhabitants of the world ! This general invocation implies that the doctrine to be taught is one of universal interest. The form of expression is similar to that in Micah i. 2 and 1 Kings xxii. 28, and may be borrowed, in all these cases, from the still stronger one in Deut. xxxii. 1. See below, Ps. 1. 1, and compare Isai. i. 2. The word translated world means primarily duration or continued existence ; then more specifically, human life, the present state of things; and by a natural transition, the world, as the place where it is spent. See above, on Ps. xvii. 14. xxxix. 6 (5), and below, on Ps. lxxxix. 48 (47.)

3 (2.) Both low and high together rich and poor. This is the conclusion of the sentence begun in the preceding verse. The first clause is highly idiomatic in its form, and cannot be literally rendered into intelligible English. Likeivise sons of man, likeivise sons of man. The word man here corresponds to two distinct Hebrew words which, when placed in opposition, denote men of higli and low degree.    See above, on Ps y. 3 (2), and below, on Ps. Ixii. 10 (9), and compare Prov. viii. 4. The same antithesis is presented in a different form, Ps. xxii. 30 (29.) The rich are here summoned to receive reproof and warning, the poor consolation and encouragement.

4 (3.) My month shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart (is) understanding. This is no self-praise, as he is only to communicate what he has received. Shall speah, is speaking or about to speak. Wisdom and understanding are both plural in the Hebrew, that form denoting fullness or variety. See above, on Ps. xviii. 51 (50.) The plural of the first word is also applied to the personification of the highest wisdom, in Prov. ix. 1. The speech mentioned in the first clause is tlis outward expression of the thought or meditation in the second See the same combination above, Ps. v. 2 (1.) xix. 15 (14.)

<!-- PAGE 435 -->
5 (4.) I ivill incline to a ])arable my ear, and open with a harp my riddle. I will hear what God says and impart it to others. To incline (or bend) the ear is to lean forward as a sign or gesture of attention. See above, on Ps. xvii. C. xxxi. 3 (2.) xl. 2 (1.) Parable, literally likeness or comparison ; then any figurative, tropical expression. See above, on Ps. xliv. 15 (14.) The parallel word here means an enigma, something hard to understand. To open it is not to begin it, but either to utter it or to explain it, probably the latter. What he hears from God he will open or expound to man. With the harp indicates the form in which his exposition is to be presented, namely, that of a lyrical composition, intended to be sung with an instrumental accompaniment. See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 2. xliii. 4.

6 (5.) Why shoidd I fear in days of evil, {when) the iniquity of my oppressors (or supplanters) shall surround me? The theme of the whole psalm is the negative proposition involved in this interrogation, namely, that the righteous has no cause to fear, even when surrounded by powerful and spiteful enemies. Days of evil, i. e. of misfortune or distress. The word translated oppressors commonly means heels; but as this yields no good sense here, it may be taken as a verbal noun, meaning either treaders, tramplers, oppressors, or supplanters, traitors, in a sense akin to which the verbal root is used, Gen. xxvii. 3G. Hos. xii. 4 (3.) In either case, it is clearly a description of his enemies, as practising violence or fraud against him.

7 (6.) Those relying on their strength, and in the abundance of their wealth they glory. A further description of the oppressors and supplanters. The Hebrew word translated strength is applied, in different cases, to bodily, pecuniary, military, and moral strength. The parallelism here would seem to  indicate a reference  to the  power  which  naturally PSALM   XUX. 413 springs from great possessions. The word translated abundance may also mean increase. For the uie of the verbal root, see above, on Ps. iii. 2 (1.) Glory, boast, or praise themselves, which last is the exact sense of the reflexive verb here used,

<!-- PAGE 436 -->
8 (7.) A brother can not (or he shall not) even redeem; a man can not give to God his ransom. In the first clause, brother may be either the subject or the object of the verb ; the •rich man cannot redeem his brother, or, his brother cannot redeem him. The former agrees better with the obvious design to show the worthlessness of mere wealth, which does not enable a man to redeem a brother, i. e. save another's life. The even, in this version is intended to express the emphatic repetition of the verb in Hebrew. It cannot do that which is most essential, and without which other advantages are worthless. Unless the last clause be regarded as a mere reiteration of the same idea in other words, it must be understood to mean that as the rich man cannot redeem his brother from the inevitable stroke of death, much less can he redeem himself, or pay to God his own ransom. This construction of the last words is the less unnatural because there is properly no reflexive pronoun in the Hebrew language.    See above, on Ps. xxxvi. 3 (2.)

9 (8.) And costly is the ransom of their soicl, and he (or tt> ceases forever. This obscure verse admits of several constructions. Their sold refers most probably to the rich man and his brother. The soul or life of both requires so much to ransom it, that neither can redeem the other. The verb in the last clause may mean ceases to live, perishes, and agree with either or with each of the subjects previously mentioned. The ransom of their life is so costly, that neither can be saved. Or the verb may agree with ransom, as in the English Bible; it is too cosily to be paid, and therefore ceases, or remains unpaid, forever. The same sense substantially may be obtained by making 14 cease mean cease (or fail) to pay, and construing it with one of the preceding nouns. The ransom is so costly that he fails to pay it, or ceases to attempt it, forever. Upon any of these various suppositions, the essential idea is that the ransom of their life is too expensive to be paid.

<!-- PAGE 437 -->
10 (9.) That he should still live forever and not see corruption. The form of the first verb in Hebrew shows that this is a dependent sentence, to be immediately connected, as some think, with the ninth verse : • he cannot even redeem a brother, a man cannot pay to God a ransom, so as to live forever and not see corruption.' The tenth verse is then a parenthetical amplification of the ninth. Others connect the ninth and tenth directly, by taking cease to mean that he cannot bring to pass. The redemption of their soul is too costly; he can never so contrive it, that he shall live forever and not see corruption.

11 (10.) For he shall see (it); wise (me?i) must die; likewise the fool and brute must perish, and leave to others their substance. The usual construction of the first words—when he sees (or for he sees) that ivise men die—is neither so simple in itself, nor so well suited to the context, as that which gives the verb the same sense, and the same object, as in the preceding verse. Wealth cannot ransom its possessor, so that he shall live forever and not see corruption, for he shall see it, as all others do. Even the wisest men must die, much more the fool and brutish person. These are the terms so frequently used in the Book of Proverbs to describe the sinner as irrational. See above, on Ps. xiv. J, and compare Prov. i. 32. x. 1. xii. 1. xxx. 2. Ecc. ii. 16. In the use of the verbs die and perish, there may be an intentional allusion to the different destiny of the wise and foolish. Likcicisc, or more literally, together, at the same  time.    See above,  Ps. iv. 9 (8), and compare Isai i. 28.    Substa?ice, strength, pecuniary strength, the same word that is used in v. 7 (6) above.

<!-- PAGE 438 -->
12 (11.) Their inward thought (is that) their houses (shall continue) for ever, their dwellings to generation and generation : they call their lands by their own names. This is substantially the common version, which is here retained because it yields a good sense, and is as probable as any other explanation of this very obscure verse. The first word in Hebrew strictly means the inside of anything, and especially of man, i. e. his mind or heart, particularly as distinguished from his words or outward conduct. See above, on Ps. v. 10 (9), and below, on Ps. lxiv. 7 (6.) The plural form at the end of the sentence occurs nowhere else, but corresponds to our word grounds, when applied to cultivated lands. As the singular, however, though it commonly means ground, seems occasionally to denote a land or country, some understand the clause to mean that they (i. e. men indefinitely) proclaim (ox celebrate) their names over lands, i. e. throughout various countries. Another possible though not a probable construction makes the jast two words mean upon earth, the form of the Hebrew noun being assimilated to that of the oarticle before it. Amidst these various constructions the essential meaning still remains unchanged, to wit, that the rich fools of the foregoing context imagine their prosperity to be perpetual.

13 (12.) And man in honour shall not lodge ; he is made like to the brutes ; they are destroyed. The and at the beginning is equivalent to and yet, or to the simple adversative but. It introduces the contrast of man's real frailty with his imaginary permanence. As if he had said, ■ such are the dreams of the rich fool, and (yet) man really, etc.' The word translated honour properly means value, price, but is applied precisely like the corresponding Greek word (™//?j.)    It here includes all that makes the condition of the.rich fool seem desirable, either to his own conceit, or to the envious admiration of his neigh* bours. In this position he is not to lodge, i. e. remain permanently, or with closer adherence to the strict sense of the verb, continue even for a night, implying that he is to perish before morning. This passage seems to have been present to our Lord's mind, when he uttered the parable of the Rich Fool. Compare especially with the verse before us, Luke xii. 20. Made like, assimilated, not in his origin, but in his end. The point of comparison seems to be their blindness and irrational destitution of all foresight. The word translated brutes may be still more closely rendered beasts, being properly descriptive of the larger quadrupeds. It might even seem in this case to denote specifically cattle or domesticated animals, as those which men are especially accustomed to see suddenly deprived of life. But this limitation .of the term is peculiar to prose style, whereas in poetry, when used distinctively, it rather signifies wild beasts. It is better, therefore, to give it here its wider sense of beasts in general, and to explain even these as mere representatives or samples of the whole class, brutes or irrational animals, like whom tne rich fooi is cut oil suddenly and unawares. They are destroyed, or as the word seems to signify originally, silenced, brought to silence, i. e. stilled or hushed in death. By assuming an enallage or sudden change of number, we may construe this verb with the human subject. lie (the rich fool) is treated like the brutes; {like these) they (the rich fools) are destroyed. A less emphatic but more obvious construction is that which refers it to the brutes themselves. He is made like to the beasts (which) are destroyed (before they are aware.)

<!-- PAGE 439 -->
14 (13.) This (is) their course ; {such is) their folly ; and (yet) after them (men) will delight in what they say. Selah. Their way or course means not only their behaviour, but their fate or destiny. See above, on Ps. i. 6. Such is their folly: literally folly (is) to them, they have folly, they are fools. The noun means originally hope or expectation ; then an overweening confidence, a fond or foolish hope ; then folly, but not without a special reference to this specific form of it. The term is peculiarly appropriate to those who had just been described as confidently looking for a permanent enjoyment of their present pleasures, when about to be deprived of them forever. After them, may refer to those who follow them in time, their successors or descendants. But as a similar explosion elsewhere denotes those who follow in the sense of imLating or adhering to a leader (Ex. xxiii. 2. 2 Samuel ii. 10), it is best to retain this meaning in the case before us. They wlio follow them, their imitators, their adherents, will delight in their mouth, approve of what they say, adopt their principles, and act upon their maxims. The general meaning of the verse, as thus explained, is that notwithstanding the gross folly of such sinners, as proved by the end to which it brings them, they will still find some to walk in their footsteps and to share their ruin. Against this propagated and perpetuated folly there is a tacit but emphatic protest in the meditative pause which follows, and in the Selah which denotes it.

<!-- PAGE 440 -->
15 (14.) Like a flock to the grave they drive ; death is then shepherd ; and the righteous shall rule over them in the morning ; and their form the grave (is) to consume ; from (their) home to him (they go or they belong) This is one of the most obscure and difficult verses in the book, although its general meaning is obvious enough. Like sheep, or like a flock, i. e. blindly, in confusion, and without choice or foresight of their own. See above, on v. 13 (12.) Hell, in the wide old English sense of the grave or the state of the dead. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) ix. 18 (17.) xvi. 10. xviii. 6 (5.) xxx. 4 (3.) xxxi. 18 (17.) They drive : the Hebrew verb, like the English one. 18* is active in form, but really involves a passive meai ,ng, they are driven, literally put or placed. See above, on Ps. xii. (> (5.) The figure of a ilock is carried out by representing Death as the shepherd, by whom they are led or driven. The literal meaning of the words is, Death shall feed them, but the Hebrew verb means to feed as a shepherd ; or rather to perform the whole office of a shepherd. To this word and its synonyme in Greek (tioiuuIpw) we have no exact equivalent in English. The bald translation, death shall feed them, seems to imply that the prominent idea is that of nourishment, whereas it is that of guidance or direction. The common version, death shall feed on them, although not ungrammatical, is entirely at variance with the figure of a flock and a shepherd, which immediately precedes. The verb translated rule seems originally to denote the act of treading on or trampling, in which sense it is supposed to be used by Joel iv. 13 (iii. 13.) If this sense be adopted here, the idea may be either that of treading on a grave, or on the neck of a conquered enemy. As the Hebrew verb, however, in every other case, means to rule over, and especially when followed by the same preposition as in this place, it is better to adhere to the established usage, which affords a perfectly good sense, namely, that the righteous shall soon triumph over their once prosperous oppressors. At break of day, or in the morning, i. e. very soon, to-morrow, with allusion, no doubt, to the form of expression in v. 13 (12) above, and to the general use of night and morning, as figures for distress and relief from it. See above, on Ps. xxx. 6 (5.) Their form, shape, figure, perhaps with an implication of beauty, which is expressed in the English version. Consume, literally make old, wear out, waste away. See above on Ps. jexxii. 3. Is to consume, will do so, or is about to do so. The last clause is even more obscure than what precedes. The last word in Hebrew means to him (or it), which most interpreters exchange, by an enallage of number, into them.    It may how ever be referred directly to the nearest antecedent, hell, the grave, or to death, personified in the first clause. *From (their) dwelling, i. e. driven from it, (they descend or they belong) to him. However harsh the ellipsis here assumed may seem, it is really less so than to omit the preposition with some writers, or the pronoun with others, or with one to understand from dwelling to mean a dwelling which is not a dwelling, or, as we might say, an undwelling. Apart from these minute verbal difficulties, the general idea of the verse is plain, to wit that they who are now an object of envy or congratulation are soon to be deprived by death of all their coveted and boasted advantages.

<!-- PAGE 442 -->
16 (15.) Only God will redeem my soul from the hand of Hell, for he will take me. Selah. The Hebrew particle at the beginning of the sentence always denotes a limitation or exception. See above, on Ps. xxxvii. 8. xxxix. 12 (11.) It may here mean either that his own case is excepted from the destruction which he has been describing, and which might seem to be described as universal; or that God alone can afford that safety which the rich fool hopes to derive from his secular advantages. Redeem, in allusion to vs. 8, 9 (7, 8) above. The hand is a common emblem of power, but it may here belong to a personification of Sheol, the grave, or hell, like that of death in v. 15 (14.) For he ivill take me, i. e., as some suppose, will take me to himself, accept me. But as the verb is nowhere absolutely used in this sense, it is better to explain it as a parallel expression to redeem. * He will redeem me from the hand of Sheol, for he will take me (out of it.)' Either of these constructions is more natural than that which makes Sheol the subject of the last verb. • He will redeem me from the hand of Sheol, when it seizes (or would seize) me.' The hostile sense thus put upon the verb may be justified by the analogy of Isai. xxvij.L 19; but the change of subject and tho less usual meaning of the particle ps) are not to be assume* without necessity.

<!-- PAGE 443 -->
17 (1G.) Be not thou afraid because a man grows rich, because the glory of his house increases. Here begins the application or practical conclusion of the foregoing meditations. It is marked by a change of form, the Psalmist now no longer speaking of himself, but to himself or to another, as the person most directly interested in his subject. See a similar transition in Ps. xxxii. 8, and compare the parental or authoritative tone of the address with that in Ps. xxxiv. 12 (11.) Fear not, be not apprehensive or solicitous, not merely for thyself, but for the cause of truth and goodness. See above, on Ps. xxxvii. 1, The conjunction in the first clause may also be translated when or though. But the proper causal meaning of the particle should always be preferred when admissible, and especially in cases like the present", where it yields not only a good sense but the best sense, since the increasing wealth and honour of the wicked is certainly assigned as the cause or occasion of the anxious apprehensions here forbidden. The use of the English present tense in the translation of this verse is merely idiomatic, since in such connexions it is really a future. The verb of the first clause is a causative, and strictly means to enrich or makt rich. The transition to the neuter or intransitive sense is precisely similar to that of the English verb increase, which strictly means to make greater, but in this very sentence has the intransitive sense of growing (or becoming) greater. There is no other clear example of the first Hebrew verb being so used. Dan. xi. 2, and Prov. x. 4, are at least ambiguous. A man cannot of itself denote a bad man, but that idea is suggested by the context, and especially by the use of the word man in vs. 8 (7), 13 (12.) Glory or honour here includes all the sensible effects of riches, as a source of admiration and applause.    House,  in the wide sense,  common to  both  Ian PSALM  XLIX. 42] guages, including both the dwelling and the family, the house and household.    See Gen. vii. 1. xviii. 19. xxxv. 2. 1. d.     <

<!-- PAGE 444 -->
18 (17.) For not in his death will he take the whole; not down ivill go after him his glory. The form of the original is here retained as far as possible, in order to exhibit its highly idiomatic character. The position of the negative in both clauses makes it far more emphatic than in our English collocation. At his death, in his dying, when he dies. The ivhole : this word is usually rendered all, but is invariably a substantive in Hebrew, and is here determined to be such by the definite article prefixed. Not the ivhole, however, oi not all, is by no means so significant a phrase in English as in Hebrew, where the absence of indefinite pronouns makes this the only way of saying not a?iy thing, i. e. nothing. While the words therefore certainly mean that he shall not take all, they likewise mean that he shall not take any, of his secular possessions with him; and this stronger sense is here required by the context. His glory, as in the preceding verse, his wealth and the honours or distinctions springing from it. Descend after him, not in the moral or legal sense of a hereditary descent to his heirs, but in the local sense of a descent into the grave or the unseen world. The whole verse assigns a reason for not envying the wealthy sinner, namely, because he will be soon obliged to leave his wealth behind him.

19 (18.) For his soul in his life he will bless, and (others) will praise thee because thou doest good to thyself. There is no need of giving 13 the se-nse of but, though, or any other than its proper causal sense oi for, because. See above, on v. 17 (16.) This verse assigns the reason of the fact alleged in the one before it. The wealthy sinner is to carry nothing with him when he dies, because he is to have his ■ good things' in the   present   life.    This  is God's  appointment in  accordance 14* with his own free choice. In his life (or lifetime), as long as he iives, lie is to bless his soul (or himself), i. e. to reckon himself happy, and to be so esteemed by others. In the last clause, the third person is abruptly exchanged for the second, and the wealthy sinner, of whom the Psalmist had been speak ing, to himself or his disciple, is directly addressed, as if personally present. This application of the figure called apostrophe is made with great skill and rhetorical effect. The plural verb is indefinite, as in v. 14 (13) above. They, i. e. men in general, or others, as distinguished from himself. The verb itself means strictly to acknowledge or confess; then more specifically, to acknowledge benefits received, to thank, and then to praise in general. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) The primary meaning may be here still kept in view, by understanding him to mean, they will recognise thee (or take knowledge of thee) that thou doest good (or as one doing good) to thyself. There is no need of substituting either a present or a past tense for the futures, which are perfectly appropriate in speaking of a course of conduct yet to be acted out, the wealthy sinner being represented as still living, both in this verse and the one before it. There is pungent sarcasm in the close of this verse : they will praise thee because thou doest good—to thyself Or, because thou doest well—-for thyself The addition of this last phrase serves to characterize vividly, not only the rich sinner but his flatterers. There can be little doubt that our Saviour tacitly alluded to the first clause of this verse, when he made Abraham say to Dives, " Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things ; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented." (Luke xvi. 25.) This is indeed a most instructive commentary on the passage now before us, as exhibiting the future revolution in the relative position of the parties, as a reason for not envying the wealthy sinner now. It is dually certain, that the Rich Fool's address to his own soul, in Luke xii. 19, was suggested by the same clause of the psalm before us, in his lifetime he will bless his soul. Indeed the whole conception of the Rich Man in the one case, and the Rich Fool in the other, may be said to be borrowed from this psalm, and may therefore derive instructive and interesting illustration from it.

<!-- PAGE 446 -->
20 (19.) It shall go (or thou shalt go) to the generation of his fathers ; for ever they shall not see light. The first verb may be either a third person feminine, agreeing with soul, or a second person masculine, addressed directly to the wealthy sinner. In the latter case, we must suppose an immediate change to the third person, in order to account for the expression his fathers. In either case, the idea is that he shall go, though this would not be a correct translation of the Hebrew words. The whole clause has reference to the frequent description of death in the Old Testament, as a man's sleeping with his fathers, or being gathered to his fathers. Generation may be taken as a collective term, denoting the successive generations of his fathers, either natural or spiritual, i. e. either his literal progenitors, or his predecessors in the same way of thinking and the same course of life. There is no absurdity indeed in supposing the two senses to be here coincident. To 'perpetuity they shall not see, in our idiom, they shall never see. The light, i. e. the light of life, or the light of the living, an expression used by David, Ps. lvi. 14 (13.) The meaning of the whole verse is, that the wealthy sinner is to die as his fathers died before him, and continue dead like them, with out returning to revisit, much less to repossess, the riches and honours which he once imagined v/ere to last for ever. This completes the proof that these advantages are not legitimate or even rational occasions of envious dissatisfaction to the right eous.

<!-- PAGE 447 -->
21 (20.) Man (that is) in honour and understandeth not is likened to the beasts (that) are destroyed. The first verb in. this verse and the first verb in v. 13 (12) differ only in a single letter (^D"> and "pb"1), in consequence of which they are confounded by the ancient Greek and Syriac translators, and some modern critics have proposed to amend one of the places by assimilation to the other. But the prevalent practice of the Hebrew writers, where the same burden or refrain recurs, is not to repeat it slavishly, but with some slight variation in the form, which not unfrequently suggests a new idea, or modifies the one before expressed. See above, on Ps. xxiv. 10. xlii. 12 (11.) So here, at the close of the first strophe, the rich fool is compared to the brutes that perish, with respect to the uncertainty of his enjoyments ; and again at the close of the second, with respect to his irrationality, the points of comparison being distinct but inseparable. No wonder that the sinner is cut off unawares like the brutes, when in fact he is equally irrational. By tampering with the text of either passage, therefore, we take from the psalm one of its moral lessons, as well as one of its rhetorical beauties.
