<!-- psalm 52 | vol 2 | scan pages 22-23 -->

<!-- PAGE 22 -->
and punishment. See above, on Ps. iii. 4 (3.) iv. 3 (2.) The change of constitution from the imperative to the future marks a natural transition from importunate desire to confident anticipation. See above, on vs. 9—11 (7—9.) This delicate transition there is surely no need of obliterating by a gratuitous assimilation of the moods and tenses. The building of the walls is a poetical parallel to doing good or showing favour, and the opposite of dismantling in Ps. lxxxix : 41 (40.)

21 (19.) Then shalt thou be pleased with sacrifices of righteousness, burnt-offering and holocaust; then shall they offer on thine altar bullocks. Then, i. e. when thou hast done good to Zion and fortified Jerusalem. Sacrifices of righteousness, righteous or right sacrifices. See above, on Ps. iv : 6 (5.) Some have inferred from this verse, that the psalm was written in the Babylonish exile, when the temple, was in ruins and the ceremonial law suspended, and that the Psalmist here anticipates the time when both should be restored. But this is forbidden by his saying, in v. IS (16), that if God desired burnt offerings he would give them, plainly implying the continued observance of the sacrificial system. There is no ground, therefore, for disputing either the correctness of the title, which ascribes the psalm to David, or the genuineness of the last two verses, which some have rejected as an addition by a later hand. These verses are not only appropriate but necessary as a conclusion to the psalm, and every difficulty is removed by giving them their natural but figurative meaning, as an expression of desire and hope that God would favour his own people and graciously accept their service. Holocaust is here used to translate a single Hebrew, word, meaning a sacrifice entirely consume 1 upon the altar. It does not describe something wholly distinct from the burnt offering, but the burnt offering itself considered as a complete and unreserved oblation. See 1 Sam. vii 9. Bullocks are mentioned as the choicest victims in point  5>f species, size, and age.    By a slight change of construction we obtain the bold and striking declaration that the bullocks shall themselves ascend the altar, i. e. as a living and spontaneous sacrifice.    Compare Isai. lx. 7. PSALM   L II.

<!-- PAGE 23 -->
This psalm, besides the title, vs. 1, 2, contains three stanzas of three verses each. In the first, the Psalmist expostulates with an arrogant, cruel, and deceitful enemy, vs. 3—5 (1—3.) In the second, he foretells the destruction of this enemy by the divine judgments, and the contempt to be excited by his folly, vs. 6—8 (4—6.) In the third, he contrasts this fatal fruit of unbelief with the happy effects of his own trust in God, vs. 9—11 (7—9.) The two Sclahs in vs. 5, 7 (3, 5), have reference not so much to the form of the psalm as to the feelings of the Psalmist, and are therefore placed irregularly. See above, on Ps. iii. 3 (2.) The variation of the English and the Hebrew Bible, in numbering the verses of this psalm, is the same, and arises from the same cause, as in the fifty-first.

1. To the Chief Musician. Maschil. By David. The psalm is expressly designated as a Maschil or didactic psalm, because its adaptation to this purpose might very easily be overlooked, in consequence of its avowed relation to a particular event in David's history. See above, on Ps. xxxii. 1. xlii. 1. xlv. 1. Though occasioned by this incident, however, it was written for the permanent and public use of the ancient church, and is therefore inscribed to (or for) the Chief Musician. See above, on Ps iv   1   li. 1.
