<!-- psalm 53 | vol 2 | scan pages 24-33 -->

<!-- PAGE 24 -->
2. When Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech. This is merely the beginning of the story, which is supposed to be familiar to the reader of the psalm, and which is given at length in 1 Sam. xxii. Doeg is mentioned only as the witness or informer, by whose means the matter came to Saul's knowledge. When he came, literally, in his coming, the same form of expression as in Ps. li. 2.

3(1.) Why wilt thou boast thyself in evil, mighty (man) 1 The mercy of the Almighty (is) all the day. The future form of the verb suggests the idea of obstinate persistency. Boast thyself in evil, exult or triumph in the injury of others. The mighty man is not Doeg but Saul, who, of all the characters in sacred history, approaches nearest to the classical idea of a hero. There is something therefore of respect and admiration implied in the address, as if he had said, ' How can one who might have been so eminent in well-doing, glory in his shame or boast himself in evil ?' In the last clause there is an obvious antithesis between the malice of this mighty man and the unfailing goodness of the mighty God. The particular divine name here used therefore is peculiarly significant. See above, on Ps. v. 5 (4.) 1.1. As if he had said, ' Mighty and malicious as thou art, the might and mercy of Jehovah are still greater.' All the day, i. e perpetual, unceasing.    See above, on Ps. xlii. 11 (10 )

4 (2.) Mischiefs will thy tongue devise, like a razor whetted, working deceitfully. The first word means calamitous events, brought on one man by the malice of another. See above, on Ps. v. 10 (9.) xxxviii. 13 (12), and below, on Ps. Ivii. 2 (1.) The distinctive meaning of the future is the same as in v. 3 (l.j The tongue is here said to meditate or devise mischief, because it is personified, or poetically substituted for the speaker. The allusion is to Saul's cutting words when he accused Ahimelech and David of conspiracy against him (1 Sam. xxii. 13.) This false charge, or the tongue which uttered it, is likened to a razor, not merely sharp but sharpened, whetted, for the purpose or occasion. See above, on Ps. xlv. 6 (5.) Similar comparisons occur in Ps. lv. 22 (21.) lvii. 5 (4.) lix. 8 (7.) lxiv. 4 (3.) Jer. ix. 2, 7 (3, 8.) Working deceitfully, literally, deceit or fraud. These words may be grammatically referred to the speaker or his tongue as practising deceit; but it yields a more striking sense to understand them of the razor, as working deceitfully, i. e. moving silently and smoothly, when it cuts most keenly.

<!-- PAGE 25 -->
5. Thou hast loved evil (more) than good, falsehood (more) than speaking righteousness. The past tense, like the futures in the foregoing verses, includes the idea of the present; but unlike them, it represents the love of sin as already long-continued and habitual. Compare the form of expression with that in Ps. xlv. 8 (7.) Righteousness includes truth or veracity, as the genus comprehends the species. The particular unrighteousness here meant is falsehood, as appears from the antithesis. The selah tacitly suggests the writer's abhorrence of that which he describes

6 (4.) Thou hast loved all devouring words, tongue of fraud. This is not so much a continuation of the foregoing discourse, as a resumption or recapitulation for the purpose of drawing a conclusion from it. In periodic style, the connection of the ideas might be thus exhibited: ' Since then thou lovest, etc., therefore God will, etc.' Devouring words, literally, words of swallowing or deglutition. The second noun occurs only here; but the verb to swallow up is continually used in Hebrew to express the idea of complete destruction. See above, on Ps. xxi. 10 (9.) ^xxxv. 25. Tongue of deceit or deceitful tongue. This phrase may be governed by the verb, thou hast loved all devouring words  (and or even) a deceitful tongue.    But it  adds to the PSALM  LIT; 15 Btrength of the expression, and agrees better with the form of the context, to make it an apostrophe or direct address to the deceitful tongue itself.

<!-- PAGE 26 -->
7(5.) (So) likewise shall God destroy thee forever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of (thy) tent, and root thee out of the land of life. Selah. The particle at the beginning, also, likeicise, shows the dependence of this verse upon the one before it, which is really conditional, though not in form. ' As thou, on thy part, lovest all devouring words, so likewise God, on his part, will destroy thee.' No exact translation can convey the full force of the verbs in this verse, which suggest a variety of striking figures for destruction or extermination. The first denotes properly the act of pulling down or demolishing a house (Lev. xiv. 45), and this would also seem to be the primary meaning of the third (Prov. xv. 25), although some suppose it to denote the act of pulling up, and to be the opposite of plant, as the first verb is of build. The second verb, in every other place where it occurs, has reference to the handling and carrying of fire or coals. See Prov. vi. 27. xxv. 22. Isai. xxx. 14. To a Hebrew reader, therefore, it would almost necessarily suggest not the general idea of removal merely, but the specific one of removing or taking away like fire, i. e. as coals are swept out from a hearth, or otherwise extinguished. The remaining verb adds to these figures that of violent eradication, and is well represented by its English equivalent. The land of life, or, as it is commonly translated, 'and of the living, is a poetical description of life itself, or the present state of existence, under the figure of a cdtmtry. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 13. The quick recurrence of the pause implies excited feeling and invites attention to the threatening which immediately precedes.

8 (6.) And the righteous shall see, and they shall fear, and at him they shall laugh. The fear meant is that religious awe produced^)7 any clear manifestation of God's presence and his power. In Ps. lxiv. 9, 10 (8, 9), it is assumed to be compatible with joy, and here with laughter at the wicked, not a selfish exultation in his sufferings, which is explicitly condemned in the Old Testament (Prov. xxiv. 17. Job xxxi. 29), but that sense of the absurdity of sin, which must be strongest in the purest minds, and cannot therefore be incompatible with pity, the rather as it is ascribed to God himself (Ps. ii. 4.) The parono masia of the verbs translated see and fear is the same as in Ps xl. 4 (3.) Shall see, i. e. the destruction threatened in v. 7 (6.) At him, the person thus destroyed, the same who is addressed directly in the foregoing context. The enallage personae may be avoided by exchanging at him for at it, i. e. the destruction itself; but this is not so agreeable to Hebrew usage, which always prefers personal to abstract forms of speech.

<!-- PAGE 27 -->
9 (7.) Behold the man (who) will not make God his strength, hit will trust in the increase of his wealth, (and) will be strong in his wickedness. This may be regarded as the language of the laughers mentioned in v. 8 (6.) Behold the man} see to what he is reduced. The effect of the behold is similar to that of the interrogation in Isai. xiv. 16. The word, translated man is not one of the usual terms, but one implying strength or power, so that its use here gives a kind of sarcastic import to the passage. See the analogous use of an opposite expression in Ps. viii. 5 (4.) x. 18. The future expresses fixed determination and anticipated perseverance in refusing. Make, literally, place or set. See above, on Ps. xl. 5 (4.) His strength, or more exactly, his stronghold or fortress. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 1. xxxvii. 39. xliii. 2. Increase, or simply, abundance, greatness. See above, on Ps. v. 8 (7.) Ii. 3 (1.) The word translated wickedness is the singular of that translated mischiefs in v. 4 (2) above. It seems to signify particularly an inclination to malicious mischief. PSALM    LII. IT

<!-- PAGE 28 -->
10 (8.) And I (am) like a green olive-tree in the house of God, I have trusted in the mercy of God (to) eternity and perpetuity He expects not only the destruction of the wicked but his own salvation. To express the connection of the verses clearly, our idiom would require an adversative particle at the beginning, but L See above, on Ps. ii. 6. A verdant fruitful tree is a favourite emblem of prosperity. See above, on Ps. i. 3. The olive is here specified, as palms and cedars are in Ps. xcii. 13, 14 (12, 13.) The imagery of the verse before us is copied in Jer. xi. 16. The house of God, the tabernacle, considered as his earthly residence, in which he entertains his friends and provides for his own household. See above, on Ps. xv. 1. xxiii. 6. xxvii. 4, 5. xxxvi. 9 (8.) The mixed metaphors only show that the whole description is a figurative one and should be so interpreted. J have (already) trusted, which includes his present trust, but also includes more, to wit, that it is not a new or sudden impulse, but a settled habit of his soul. The two nouns, eternity and per* petuity, are combined in the adverbial sense of forever and ever. See above,on Ps. x. 16. xxi. 5 (4.) xlv. 7 (6.) xlviii. 15 (14.) This qualifying phrase relates, not to the act, but to the object, of his trust. His meaning is not, ' I will trust forever in God's mercy,T which would have required a future verb ; but, ' I have already trusted, and do still trust, in his mercy, as a mercy that will last forever.'

11 (9.) I will thank thee to eternity because thou hast done (it), and will hope (in) thy name—because it is good—before thy saints. The common version of the first verb (praise) is not sufficiently specific, as it properly denotes a particular kind of praise, namely, that for benefits received. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) vii. 18 (17.) xiix. 19 (IS.) The object of the verb hast done is to be supplied from the context See above, on Ps. xxii 32 (31.) xxxvii. 5. xxxix. 10 (9.) Thy name, the manifestation of thy nature.    See above, on Ps. v. 12 (11.) xx. 2 (1.) i8 PSALM   LIU. xxiii. 3. xlviii. 11 (10.) To expect God's name, or wait for it, is to trust in the future exercise and exhibition of the same divine perfections which have been exhibited already. The common version, I will wait on thy name, is not so happy as the one in the Prayer Book, I will hope in thy name. Here again, as in v. 10 (8), the epexegetical clause, for it is good, relates not to the act of expectation but its object. He does not mean, ' because it is good to hope in thy name,' but ' because thy name is good, and is therefore to be hoped in.' This is clear from the analogy of Ps. liv. 8 (6.) lxix. 17 (16.) cix. 21, which also shows that the concluding words, before thy saints, are to be construed neither with what follows, it is good before thy saints i. e. in their estimation, nor with the remoter antecedent I will thank thee, but with the nearer antecedent, I will wait for thy name before thy saints, i. e. I will profess my trust in thy mercy, not in private merely, but in the presence of thy people, of the church. Compare Ps. xxii. 23 (22.) For it is good must then be read as a parenthesis. Thy saints, the merciful objects of thy mercy. See above, on Ps. iv. 4 (3.) 1. 5. It is here used simply as a general designation or description of God's people. PSALM    LIII.

<!-- PAGE 29 -->
A second edition of the fourteenth psalm, with variations, more or less important, in each verse. That either of these compositions is an incorrect copy of the other, is highly improbable, because two such copies of the same psalm would not have been retained in the collection, and because the variations are too uniform, consistent, and significant, to be the work of chance or PSALM   LIfl. 19 mere traditional corruption. That the changes were deliberately made by a later writer is improbable, because such a liberty would hardly have been taken with a psalm of David, and because the later form, in that case, would either have been excluded from the Psalter, or substituted for the first form, or immediately connected with it. The only satisfactory hypothesis is, that the original author afterwards rewrote it, with such modifications as were necessary to bring out certain points distinctly, but without any intention to supersede the use of the original composition, which therefore still retains its place in the collection. This supposition is confirmed by the titles, which ascribe both psalms to David. Of this kind of retractatio, which is not unknown to the practice of uninspired hymnologists, we have already met with a remarkable example in the case of David. See above, the concluding note on Ps. xviii, vol. 1. p. 153. As a general fact, it may be stated, that the variations in the psalm before us are such as render the expression stronger, bolder, and in one or two cases more obscure and difficult. To these variations the remarks which follow will be restricted. For the exposition of the parts which are common to both psalms, the reader is referred to that of Ps. xiv.

<!-- PAGE 30 -->
1. To the Chief Musician—upon Mahalath—Maschil—by David. Between the inscription to the Chief Musician and the name of David, which are also found at the beginning of Ps. xiv, we have here two additional expressions. The first of these is by some regarded as the name or description of an instrument; but as it is so used nowhere else, and as forms almost identical occur more than once in the sense of sickness or disease, (Ex. xv 26. Prov. xviii. 14. 2 Chr. xxi. 15), it seems most natural to take the phrase as an enigmatical enunciation of the subject of the psalm, which is in strict accordance both with general usage and with that of David in particular. See above, on Ps. v. 1. xxii. 1   xiv. 1.     By disease we  may then understand  the spiritual malady with which mankind are all infected, and which is really the theme or subject of the composition. In the only other title where it reappears (Ps. lxxxviii. 1), it denotes corporeal disease. The other addition (maschil) describes the psalm as a didactic one.    See above, on Ps. lii. 1

<!-- PAGE 31 -->
2 (1.) The fool hath said in his heart. There is no God They have done corruptly, they have done abominable wickedness, there is none doing good. See above, on Ps. xiv. 1. The only variation in this verse is the substitution of (bis) iniquity for (nr^b?) deed or act. Instead of saying, they have made (their) conduct abominable, the Psalmist uses the stronger expression, they have made iniquity abominable, or done abominably (in their) wickedness.

3 (2.) God from heaven has looked down on the sons of man, to see if there is (any) acting wisely, seeking God. See above, on Ps. xiv. 2. The only difference in the Hebrew of these verses is that the name Elohim is here substituted for Jehovah. The same change occurs below, in vs. 5, 6, 7 (4, 5, 6.) The name Jehovah is not used at all in the psalm before us, but occurs four times in Ps. xiv, and Elohim thrice. This difference seems to mark Ps. liii as the later composition, in which the writer aimed at an external uniformity, which did not occur to him at first. This is a much more natural supposition than that he afterwards varied what was uniform at first. The attempts which have been made to account, still more particularly, for the use of the divine names in these two psalms, have entirely failed.

4 (3.) All of it has apostatized ; together they have putrefied; there is none doing good ; there is not even one. See above, on Ps. xiv. 3. For all of it we there have the whole, i. e. the whole human race. The same thing seems to be intended by the more obscure phrase, all of it, in which the pronoun may refer tf man, in the collective sense of mankind or the human race. The idea of departure from God, apostasy, is expressed in the parallel places by two verbs almost identical in form (^iD and so), the one of which means properly to turn aside and the other to turn back.

<!-- PAGE 32 -->
5 (4.) Do they not know—(these) workers of iniquity— eating my people 'as) they eat bread—{and on) God call not ? See above, on Ps. xiv. 4. The only variation here, besides the change of the divine name which has been already mentioned, is the omission of the all before workers of iniquity. This has been noted by some critics as the only case in which the language of the fourteenth psalm is stronger than the parallel expression of the fifty-third.

6 (5.) There have they feared a fear, because God hath scattered the hones of thy besieger ; thou hast put (them) to shame, because God hath rejected them. See above, on Ps. xiv. 5, 6. The design to strengthen the expression is particularly clear in this case, where two verses are compressed into one, and the other changes all enhance the emphasis. Thus instead of a general assurance of divine protection, God is in the righteous generation, we have here a description of their enemies' destruction, in the most poetical and striking terms, God hath scattered the bones of thy besieger, literally, thy erxamper, him that encampeth against thee. So too instead of the complaint, that the wicked treat the faith of pious sufferers with contempt—the counsel of the sufferer ye will shame because Jehovah is his refuge—we have here the tables turned upon the scoffers by the scorn both of God and man—thou hast put to shame (the individuals included in the collective phrase thy besieger), because God has rejected them, an act implying both abhorrence and contempt. In this, which is by far the most considerable variation of the two editions, the existence of design is so apparent, that the supposition of an in- 22 PSALM  LTV advertent or fortuitous corruption seems preposterous. So fai are the two psalms from being contradictory or even inconsistent, that they might be sung together, by alternate or responsive choirs, with the happiest effect. Nothing can be more natural, therefore, than the supposition that David gave the psalm this new shape, to express the same essential feelings in a higher degree and a more emphatic form.

<!-- PAGE 33 -->
7 (6.) Who will give, out of Zion salvations \to) Israel—in God's reluming (to) the captivity of his people—let Jacob exult, let Israel joy ! See above, on Ps. xiv. 7. The only variations are the change of Jehovah to Elohim, and of the singular salvation to its plural, denoting variety and fulness. See above, on Ps. xviii. 51 (50.) The exact translation is, salvations of Israel, and the meaning of the next clause, l when God revisits, (or in God's revisiting) his captive people.' PSALM   LIT.

1. To the Chief Musician. With (or on) stringed instruments A didactic psalm. By David. This is the title of Ps. iv, but with a change of the generic term mizmor to the specific one maschil. See above, on Ps. liii. 1. According to .some modern interpreters, the plural neginoth does not denote a plurality of stringed instruments, but simply that kind of music, with its complex variety of tones. The psalm consists of a prayer for deliverance from wicked enemies, vs.. 3—5.(1—3), with a confident antic*
