<!-- psalm 65 | vol 2 | scan pages 101-105 -->

<!-- PAGE 101 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm. By David. A Song, i. e. a song of praise. See above, on Ps. xlviii. 1. xlii. 9 (8.) God is first praised in general, as a God of mercy and benevolence to all men, vs. 2—9 (1—8), and then in particular, as the giver of fruitful seasons and abundance, vs. 10—14 (9—13.)

2(1.) To thee fbelongeth) silence, praise, oh God, in Zion, and to thee shall be paid the vow The two words silence-praise form a kind of compound term, like humility-righteousness in Ps. xlv. 5 (4,) meaning, as some suppose, silent praise, but this is hardly consistent with the fact that the praise here offered is vocal. More probably it means such praise as is accompanied by a cessation of all tumultuous and passionate excitement. See PSALM   LXV. 9] above, on Ps. lxii. 2, 6 (1, 5.) In Zion, as the appointed place of prayer and praise under the old economy. The last clause implies that fresh occasion was continually given for thankful vows and their fulfilment, by the constant repetition of God's providential favours.

<!-- PAGE 102 -->
3 (2.) Hearer of prayer, up to thee shall all flesh come. The first word in Hebrew is a participle, hearing, thou who habitually hearest prayer. This is mentioned as one of the divine characters or attributes. Up to thee, even to thee, implying actual arrival, and therefore a stronger expression than unto thee. All flesh sometimes means all animals, all  living creatures (Gen. vi. 17, 19), but is here used in its narrower sense of all mankind (Gen. vi. 3, 12.) To thee they shall come, i. e. must come, for the supply of their necessities, the forgiveness of their sins, and in short for every good and perfect gift (James i. 17), both of a temporal and spiritual nature.

4 (3.) Words of iniquities are too strong for me; (as for) our transgressions, thou icilt expiate them, or forgive them for the sake of an atonement. Words of iniquities is by some regarded as a pleonastic paraphrase for iniquities themselves. More probably, however, the phrase means the charge or accusation of iniquity. See above, on Ps. vii. 1. xli. 9, (8), and below, on Ps. cv. 27. Too strong for me, more than I am able to account for or endure. See above, on Ps. xl. 13 (12), and below, on Ps. exxx. 3. The last clause contains the encouragement suited to the alarming situation mentioned in the first.

5 (4.) Happy (he whomj thou wilt choose and bring (him) near, i. e. admit him to thy presence and to intimate communion with thee, (so that) he shall inhabit thy courts ; ice shall be sated, satisfied or filled, with the good, i. e. the pleasure, the enjoyment, of thy house, the holy (place) thy temple, or thy holy temple, thy sanctuary, an expression used both of the tabernacle and the temple properly so called. See above, on Ps. v. 8 (7.) The privilege described is not merely that of public worship at the place of God's appointment, but of residence in his family and participation in the privileges of his household. See above, on Ps. xv. 1. xxiii. 6. The change from the third person singular to the first plural shows that the former was only an individualization of the church or chosen people.

<!-- PAGE 103 -->
6 (5.) Fearful things in righteousness thou wilt answer us, oh God of our salvation, the confidence of all the ends of the land and sea—(even) the furthest. Thou wilt give us fearful answers to our prayers, i. e. such as are suited to excite religious reverence and awe. The confidence, the object of their trust. Earth (or land) and sea are put together to describe the whole world, and the ends of both for the remotest countries, which idea is then expressed directly, by the word at the end of the sentence. The superlative cannot be expressed in Hebrew, but is here suggested by the context. The sense is not that all men actually feel this trust in God, but that whether they feel it or not, they are really dependent upon him alone.    Compare Isai. xlii. 4.

7 (6.) Fixing the mountains by his strength, girded with power. This verse accounts for the dependence of all creatures upon God by a reference to his almighty power, which is not described in general terms, but by one of its eifects or acts, the settling of the mountains, as the most solid and immovable portions of the earth. He is then metaphorically represented as girded or invested with power.    See below, on v. 13 (12.)

8 (7.) Stilling the roar of seas, the roar of their waves, the tumult of nations. The sentence is continued from the foregoing verse. God not only formed the material universe at first, but still controls it. There is here a beautiful transition from the literal to the figurative use of the same language.    It is true, in the strict sense, that God stills the raging of the seas; but it is also true that he subdues the commotion of human societies and states, of which the sea is a natural and common emblem. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 3, 4 (2, 3.) Hence he adds in express terms, the tumult of nations.

<!-- PAGE 104 -->
9 (8.) Then were afraid those* inhabiting the ends (or most distant parts) of thy signs; the outgoings of morning and evening thou wilt make to shout (or sing.) Then is not expressed in Hebrew, but employed in the translation to show the dependence of the verb on that of the preceding sentence. The sense is that whenever God thus stills the tumult of the nations, even the remotest are affected by his signs, i. e. the sensible indications of his presence and immediate agency. Outgoings is a local noun in Hebrew, and denotes the places where the evening and the morning come forth or begin, i. e. the points at which the sun sets and rises, the east and west, here put for eastern and western lands, and these for their inhabitants. That the fear mentioned in the first clause is not mere slavish dread, but an affection perfectly compatible with joy, is clear from the remainder of the sentence.

10 (9.) Thou hast visited the earth and drenched it; thou wilt much enrich it; the river of God is full of water ; thou wilt prepare their corn, for thus thou dost prepare it, i. e. the earth, for this very purpose. God is said to visit his creatures when he manifests his presence with them, whether in the way of judgment or of mercy. See above, on Ps. viii. 5 (4.) Drenched, soaked, or made to overflow. The word translated much is the same as in Ps. lxii. 3 (2.) The river of God, as opposed to earthly streams. However these may fail, the divine resources are exhaustless. Their corn, that required for men's subsistence. See above, on Ps. iv. 8 (7.)    The meaning of the last clause seems to be that he who provides rain to fertilize the earth, may be expected to provide the fruit itself.

<!-- PAGE 105 -->
11 (10.) Its furrows drench, its ridges heat down; with showers thou wilt soften it; its vegetation thou wilt bless. The first verb means to water abundantly, the second to lower or beat down, implying a great violence of rain. The word translated showers, according to its etymology and usage, denotes frequent and abundant rains. Soften, dissolve, or loosen it. The Hebrew verb is a derivative of that in Ps. xlvi. 7 (6.) Vegetation, germination, that which sprouts or springs up from the seed when sown. Some make the verbs in the first clause infinitives, determined by the finite tenses which precede and follow. But their form permits them to be taken as imperatives, from which the transition to the future is entirely natural and in accordance with the usage of David's psalms, whenever an expression of confident anticipation is to be immediately subjoined to one of strong desire.    See above, on Ps. liv. 3 (1.)

12 (11.) Thou hast crowned the year of thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness. The first clause may either mean, thou hast crowned the year ivith thy goodness, or, as some prefer to construe it, thou hast crowned the year of thy goodness, the year distinguished by thy goodness, with particular instances and proofs of that goodness. The obvious meaning of the strong but beautiful figure in the last clause is, that wherever he appears his movements are attended by a rich and fertilizing influence. Fatness is as usual a figure for rich food, and that for general abundance

13 (12.) They drop—the pastures of the wilderness, and (with) joy the hills are girt. The word translated pastures properly means dwellings, but is specially applied to folds and pastures, as the places to which flocks resort. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 1. The word translated wilderness, according to its most probable
