<!-- psalm 73 | vol 2 | scan pages 154-165 -->

<!-- PAGE 154 -->
PSALM   LXXII.

A glowing description of the reign of the Messiah, as right eons, vs. 1—7, universal, vs. 8—11, beneficent, vs. 12—14, perpetual, vs. 15—17, to which are added a doxology, vs. 18, 19, and a postscript, v. 20.

1. By Solomon. Oh God, thy judgments to the king give, and thy righteousness to the king's son. The form of expression in the first clause or title is precisely the same as in the phrase so often rendered, by David. That it designates the author, may be argued, not only from this usage, but from the fact, that the imagery of the psalm is as evidently borrowed from the peaceful and brilliant reign of Solomon, as that of the second from the martial and triumphant reign of David. The prayer in this verse is virtually a prediction, as the psalmist only asks what he knows that God will give. The judicial power, under the theocracy, was exercised in God's name and by his representatives. See Deut. i. 17. Ex. xxi. 6. xxii. 7, 8. Prov. viii. 15. 2 Chr. xix. 6. The Messiah was therefore expected to exhibit this peculiar character in its perfection. See Isai. xi. 2, 3. By the king and the king's son we are not to understand the descendants and successors of David indefinitely, but the last and greatest of them in particular.

2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy afflicted {ones) with judgment. This is stated as the necessary consequence of the granting of the prayer in the preceding verse 1 Give him thy righteousness, and then he shall judge, etc There is no need therefore of putting an optative sense upon the future, ' let him judge, etc.,' especially as it would then be necessary to extend the same construction to the verses following, and so long a series of optative expressions is without example.

<!-- PAGE 155 -->
3. (Then) shall the mountains hear peace for the people, and the hills, by righteousness. The effect of the divine gift asked at the beginning of the psalm is still described in this verse, under the figure of a general growth or harvest of peace, to spring up in the whole land. Bear, in the sense of bringing forth, producing. Mountains and hills are mentioned as the salient points or prominent features of the country. This was the more natural aa the hills of Palestine were carefully tilled in ancient times, as appears from the terraces still visible. See above, Ps. lxv. 13 (12), and below, Ps. cxlvii. 8, and compare Deut. xxxiii. 15 Peace, as opposed to war and its accompanying evils. This is often mentioned as a characteristic trait of the Messiah's reign. See Isai. ii. 4. ix. 6, 7 (5, 6.) xi. 9. lxv. 25. Mic. iv. 3. Zech. ix. 10. It was typified by the peaceful reign of Solomon (1 Kings v. 4), whose very name suggests it. The hills, i. e. the hills shall bear peace or produce it. The words by righteousness belong to both clauses and denote that the peace here promised was to be the fruit of righteous government.

4. He shall judge the afflicted of the people ; he shall save (or bring salvation) to the sons of the needy, and shall crush (or break in pieces) the oppressor. To judge them is to do them justice, to redress their wrongs and vindicate their rights. The afflicted of the people, those who suffer among the chosen people. The needy or the poor man is an ideal person, representing the whole class, whose individual members are described as his sons or children

<!-- PAGE 156 -->
b. They shall fear thee with the sun, and before the moon, generation of generations. The first verb may be oonstrued with the, sons of the needy, or taken indefinitely, men shall fear thee, which is nearly equivalent to saying, thou shall be feared. The verb itself denotes religious reverence or awe, and is here put for worship. The object of address, here and throughout the psalm, is God, whose worship is described as one fruit of the righteous reign predicted. With the sun, as long as they have the sun with them, i. e. possess or enjoy him. Before the moon, in her presence, as long as she continues to be visible, or to afford them light. This is one of the scriptural expressions for perpetual duration, an idea which is also expressed by the idiomatic phrase, generation of generations, i. e. through all generations, or from one generation to another.

6. He shall come down like ram upon mown (grass), like showers, the watering of the earth (or land.) This beautiful comparison suggests the idea of a gentle yet refreshing and fertilizing influence, to be exerted by the king, whose reign is here foretold. The word translated showers, by its etymological affinities, suggests the idea of abundance or copiousness. The noun which follows occurs only here, but may be traced to verbal roots which mean to drop or to flow.

7. In his days shall the righteous sprout, spring up, or shoot forth, and abundance of peace, till the failure (or cessation) of the moon. The idea is the same as in vs. 3, 5, with a slight change in the form of the expression. By a lively figure, the righteous man is substituted for righteousness in the abstract, as the fruit of the earth and the productive cause of peace. The idea of perpetuity is again conveyed by repeating one of the comparisons in v. 5.

8. And he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river to tlifi vol. n 7 ends of the ete'h. There is here an obvious allusion to the limits of the land of promise, as denned in Ex. xxiii. 31 ; but that these are not directly intended in the case before us, is clear from the mention of foreign kings and nations in the following verses. The meaning rather is, that as the realm of the theocratic kings was bounded by the Mediterranean and the Euphrates, that of the Messiah, whom they represented, should extend from sea to sea, i. e. from any sea to any other, even the most distant, or from any sea around to the same point again, and from the river (Euphrates), or from any other river, as a terminus a quo, to the **noj3 of the earth. In Dther words, it should be universal. The came mode of describing the extent of Christ's dominion is adopted by the prophets. See Zech. ix. 10, and compare Am. viii. 12. Mic. vii. 12.

<!-- PAGE 157 -->
9. Before him shall crouch wild (men,) and his enemies the dust shall lick. The first noun denotes dwellers in the wilderness, and is applied both to brutes (Isai. xiii. 21. xxxiv. 14. Jer. 1. 39J and men (Ps. lxxiv. 14.) The common version of the first verb (bow) is too weak in itself and in comparison with the parallel expression, lick the dust, implying the most unconditional and abject submission.

10. The kings of Tarshish and the Islands an oblation shall send back ; the kings of Shcba and Seba a reward shall bring near. The last noun in the first clause, and the verb in the second, are technical terms of the Mosaic law, the first denoting specially a vegetable offering, and the other the solemn act of presentation in God's presence. The use of these expressions implies that what is here described is not the mere payment of tribute or the presentation of friendly gifts, but a religious offering. It is also worthy of remark, that the verb in the first clause, and the last noun in the second, both suggest the idea, not of  a simple  gift,  but of a recompence or  requital, perhaps in allusion to the benefits which Christ was to bestow upon tho nations, and of which these gifts would be a thankful acknowledgment. The verb return, however, is used elsewhere to denote the simple act of paying tribute. See 2 Kings iii. 4. xvii. 3. The proper names in this verse are mere specimens or samples of the nations generally. Tarshish is mentioned, both as a well known mart or source of wealth, and as a representative of the extreme west. The Islands, agreeably to Hebrew usage, include all distant sea-coasts, but particularly those of the Mediterranean. The distant south is represented, in like manner, by Sheba, a province of Arabia Felix, and Seha, now commonly supposed to be Meroe, a part of ancient Ethiopia, both famous for their wealth and commerce. The obvious allusion to the Queen of Sheba's visit to Jerusalem (1 Kings x. 1—10) is another stroke in this prophetic picture evidently borrowed from the times of Solomon.

<!-- PAGE 158 -->
11. And to him shall all kings how (or prostrate themselves), all nations shall serve him. That the preceding verse contains only a sample of the nations over whom the Messiah was to reign, is distinctly intimated by the universal and unqualified expressions of the verse before us. The act described in the first clause is one expressive both of civil homage and religious worship. The same thing is true of the verb in the last clause, which may be applied either to the civil service of a sovereign by his subjects, or to the religious service of a deity by his worshippers. In this case, as in v. 10, both were meant to be included.

12. For he will deliver the needy crying (to him for help), and the sufferer, and him that hath no helper. The literal translation of the last clause is, and there is no one helping him, or, and there is no helper to him. By referring the pronoun to the sufferer mentioned just before, we may take this, not as the description of a third class, but as a further description of the second, the, sufferer to whom there is no helper. The whole verse represents the king in question as the protector, not the oppressor, of his subjects, and assigns a reason for their tribute being represented as a requital of benefits received.    See above, on v. 10.

<!-- PAGE 159 -->
13. He will have pity on (or spare) the poor and needy, and the souls (or lives) of the needy he will save. In the first clause the adjectives are of the singular number and properly denote the poor (man) and the needy (man.) The change to the plural in the second clause, needy (ones) or needy (people), shows that the singular was not meant to denote a real individual, but rather an ideal person, representing a whole class, which is then directly designated by the plural.

14. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and precious shall their blood be in his eyes (or sight.) This last is an idiomatic expression of the idea, that a person sets such a value on the life of another, that he will not suffer it to be destroyed. See below, on Ps. cxvi. 15, and compare 1 Sam. xxvi. 21. 2 Kings i. 14.

15. And he, the poor man thus delivered, shall live, shall be preserved alive, and, in token of his gratitude and willing subjection to such a sovereign, he shall give to him, as tribute, of the gold of Sheba, one of the regions mentioned in v. 10 and famous for its gold ; and he, meaning still the grateful tributary, shall fray for him continually, i. e. for the progress and extension of Messiah's kingdom ; all the day (long) shall he bless Jam, i. e. praise him, as well for what he is in himself, as for the gifts which he bestows. By some interpreters the meaning is reversed and the sentence made to signify, that the Messiah shall live again, or live forever, and give precious gifts to the believer, and by his constant intercession secure to him the blessing of Jehovah.    This is a good sense in itself and appropriate to the context; but the dubious question of construction seems to be determined by the mention of the gold of Sheba, which, in this connection, far more probably denotes the tribute of the subject than the favour of the sovereign. See above, on v. 10.

<!-- PAGE 160 -->
16. Let there he (but) a handful of corn in the land, in the top of the mountains ; its fruit shall wave (or shake) like Lebanon, and they shall flourish from the city like grass of the earth. The first noun in Hebrew occurs only here, and has been taken in senses directly opposite. The rabbinical tradition makes it mean a handful, the modern lexicographers a plenty, each relying on a doubtful etymology. According to the second explanation, the clause is a direct prediction of abundance and should be translated, there shall be plenty of corn in the land. According to the other and more ancient view, the verse contains a beautiful antithesis between the small beginnings and the vast results of the Messiah's kingdom, not unlike that suggested by our Saviour's parable of the grain of mustard seed. Thi3 exegetical analogy, together with the striking character imparted to the verse by thisinterpretation, are sufficient to entitle it to the preference, even without regard to its antiquity and traditional authority. The apocopated future (W) may then be taken in its proper sense, as a concession or a wish, equivalent to saying, though there be but a handful of corn in the land, and that in the least favourable situation, on the top of a mountain, which though cultivated (see above, on v. 3,) must of course be colder and less fertile than the plains below. Neither wave nor shake conveys the full force of the Hebrew verb, which suggests the additional idea of a rushing noise, like that of the wind among the cedars of Lebanon. This comparison is certainly more natural and obvious than that which some interpreters assume with the grain-crops or harvestfields of Lebanon itself. This would be merely likening one harvest to another, nor is any such allusion ever made elsewhere ttr !50 PSALM   LXXII the mountain, though its circumjacent plains and valleys were productive. Sec Hos. xiv. 5—7. The word translated flourish means originally to shine or glitter (Ps. cxxxii. 18), but is specially applied to the brilliancy of vegetation, and might therefore be translated bloom or blossom. See Num. xvii. 23 (8), and compare Ps. xc. 6, xcii. 8 (7.) ciii. 15. From the city seems to mean from Jerusalem or Zion, as the centre of Messiah's kingdom and his royal residence, out of which this productive influence was to go forth. Compare the form of expression in this clause with Num. xxiv. 19. Job v. 25.

<!-- PAGE 161 -->
17. His name shall be forever ; in the presence of the sun, i. e. as long as the sun shines, his name shall propagate (itself) ; and by him shall they (i. e. men in general) bless themselves ; all nations shall felicitate him (or pronounce him happy.) The form of expression in the second clause is borrowed from the patriarchal promises (Gen. xii. 3. xviii. 18. xxviii. 14), and is intended to suggest the idea there expressed, that the Messiah should be not only blessed himself, but a source of blessing to all nations. As the happiness of the parent is bound up in that of the children, and the prosperity of the sovereign inseparable from that of the subjects, the one part of this prediction necessarily implies the other. If the head is blessed, so must be the members, the whole body. If all nations are to call Messiah blessed, it must be because he is the author and the giver of their own prosperity, nay more, of their salvation.

18, 19. Blessed (be) Jehovah, God, the God of Israel, doing wonders alone, and blessed (be) his glorious name to eternity, and filled ivith his glory be the whole earth. Amen and Amen. This is commonly explained as a doxology belonging, not to this psalm, but to the second book, of which it marks the close. See above, on Ps. xli. 14 (13.) But as the psalm would end Bomewhat abruptly with  the foregoing   verse, and as this addi- PSALM   LXXIT. 151 tion carries out the idea there expressed, by giving, as it were, the very words in which the nations shall pronounce him blessed, we have reason to believe that the doxology was added by the author, and that this conclusion of the psalm was not the effect but the occasion of its being placed at the close of one of the traditional divisions of the psalter. The wish in the second clause of v. 19 is borrowed from the promise in Num. xiv. 21, of which this whole psalm is in fact a prolonged echo.

<!-- PAGE 162 -->
20. Ended are the prayers of David, Son of Jesse. The position of this sentence after the doxology, and its prosaic form, show that it forms no part of the psalm, but relates to the whole series preceding. It does not therefore prove, as some suppose, that Solomon was not the author of the seventy-second psalm, since this exception and a very few others could not prevent the collection being called the prayers of David. A potiorifit denominatio. In like manner, the whole Psalter is still called the Psalm of David by many who believe it to contain some psalms by other writers. That this is the conclusion of an original and separate collection, is by no means probable, as there is no historical proof that such collections ever existed, and it would not be easy to account for the omission of so many psalms undoubtedly composed by David. On the whole, it is most probable, that these words were added to the first great subdivision of the whole collection, as entirely composed of psalms by David and his contemporaries, with a few added to them on account of some marked similarity in form or substance. The only remaining supposition is that these words are part of the original composition, and were added by Solomon to show that what he here predicts would be the fulfilment of his father's wishes and the answer to his prayers. The objection to this, besides the form and position of the verse itself, is, that the verb is never used to denote fulfilment or accomplishment, except in the Hebrew of the later books. See Ezra i. 1 Dan. xii. 7. 152 rSALM   LXXI11

<!-- PAGE 163 -->
1 A Psalm. By Asaph. Only good to Israel (is) God, to the pure of heart. This last expression is added to limit or explain the application of the national name Israel, as here denoting not the race or nation, simply as such considered, but the true Israel, the sincere and spiritual members of the ancient church. To these God is good, and only good, i. e. never otherwise, never unmerciful, or even indifferent. This is the theme of the whole psalm, and the peculiar form in which it is propounded has reference to the previous conflicts and misgivings of the Psalmist, through which he had passed in reaching the conviction here expressed. As if he had said, ' I once thought otherwise, but now I know that God is only good, and always good, to the true Israel, his real people.' He then goes on to describe the conflicts thus tacitly referred to, first, by a statement of the facts out of which they sprang, vs. 2—11, then of the effect which these produced upon his mind, vs. 12—16, and then of the means by which he had been disabused, vs. 17—20, and under the influence of which he now condemns his own irrationality vs. 21—22, adores the grace by which he had been rescued from the consequences of his error, vs> 23—24, and concludes with an expression of his hearty reliance upon that grace for his safety and happiness hereafter, vs. 25—28. There is not the slightest ground for doubting the correctness of the title, which ascribes the psalm to Asaph, the contemporary of David and his chief musician, and himself moreover PSALM   LXXIII 153 an inspired Psalmist. This last fact, which is matter of recorded history (see above, on Ps. 1.1), together with the fact that where only one name is mentioned in the title of a psalm it is uniformly that of the writer, may suffice to set aside the supposition, that Asaph is only named as the performer.

<!-- PAGE 164 -->
2. And I (or as for me), my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. The pronoun in the first clause is emphatic. I, who so confidently make this profession of my faith in God's unchanging goodness, am one whose feet were almost gone, literally, inclined or bent, either from the straight course or from an erect position. See above, on Ps. lxii. 3 (2), where the same verb is applied to a wall inclined or bent by violence. The phrases rendered almost and well nigh strictly mean like little and like nothing, and imply that it wanted little or nothing of a fearful fall on his part, in other words, that he had narrowly escaped it. Slipped, literally, poured out, which seems to be a figure both for weakness and divergence. Instead of pursuing a direct course, or remaining in a firm position, his steps were scattered and without effect, like water poured upon the ground. See above, on Ps. xxii. 15 (14.)

3. For I was envious at the proud ; the peace of wicked (men) I see (and must see.) He now proceeds to state more distinctly the nature of the fall from which he had so narrowly escaped. It was the sin and folly of denying the justice and fidelity of God because of providential inequalities and mysteries. The proud or insolent, a general description of the wicked, as in Ps. v. 5 (4.) The common version in both places (foolish) is less probable, but does not materially change the sense. In the last clause, he reverts to his experience at an earlier date, and expresses himself as he might have done at that time. This relation of the clauses may be rendered clearer by supplying a word or phrase between them     i I was envious at the proud fand said), the peace,' etc 7* !54 PSALM   LXXI1I. Peace, as the negation and the opposite of all disturbing causes, really suggests the idea of prosperity in general. The future form of the verb has respect, not to the date of composition, but to that of the events recorded, when the Psalmist not only saw, but expected long to see, the undisturbed prosperity of sinners.

<!-- PAGE 165 -->
4. For there are no lands at their death ; and fat, i. e. healthy or robust, (is) their strength. Some understand the first clause to mean that they are not bound or forced to die like other men. The more obvious sense is, that when they do die, they are not in bonds or chains like other men, but free, common figures for distress or suffering and its opposite.

5. In the labour of man they are not, they are not partakers in the common troubles of humanity, and with mankind they are not smitten (or afflicted.) The use of the future is precisely the same as in v. 3. They are not, and to all appearance never will be, sharers in the common calamities of life.

6. Therefore pride has enchained them, the garb of violence (injustice or cruelty) covers them. The first verb strictly means to encircle or adorn the neck, perhaps with allusion to the carriage of that member as indicative of pride. See Isai. iii. 16. Job xv. 26.

7. Their eyes stand out with fatness; the imaginations of the heart pass (out, come forth, or are disclosed.) The common version of the last clause, they have more than heart could wish, assumes as the literal meaning of the words, they surpass the de-* sires of their heart. According to the other construction above given, the meaning is that as their eyes stand out with fatness, so their hearts overflow with evil thoughts. Compare Matt. xii. 35 xv. 19. Mark vii. 21. Luke ii. 35. vi. 45.
