<!-- psalm 74 | vol 2 | scan pages 166-185 -->

<!-- PAGE 166 -->
8. They mock and speak in wickedness (or malice) ; oppression from on high they speak. To speak oppression is to speak words tending to the injury of others. From on high, proudly, with arrogant contempt of others. They speak as if from a superior position.

9. They set their mouth in heaven, and their tongue goes on earth. The idea in the first clause is the same as in the last clause of the foregoing verse. They speak as if they thought themselves superior beings, their mouth in heaven and their tongue on earth.     Goes, runs, is actively employed.

10. Therefore he brings back his people hither, and waters of fulness are wrung out to them (or drained by them.) This obscure verse admits of several interpretations, the most natural of which understands the sense to be, that God still suffers or requires his people to survey the painful spectacle and drain the bitter draught presented by the undisturbed prosperity of wicked men. According to the masoretic reading in the margin of the Hebrew Bible, the first verb is intransitive, his people shall (or must) return hither.    See above, on Ps. xiv. 7. liii. 7 (6.)

11. And they say, hoio should God know, and (how J can thire be knowledge in the Highest ? Some interpreters regard these as the words of the prosperous sinners whom he has been describing. But according to the sense just put upon the tenth verse, the eleventh must express the misgivings of God's people, with respect to the providential inequalities in question. When still brought back to the sight of these, they are constrained to ask how they can possibly be reconciled with the hypothesis of God's omniscience. This is much more natural than to suppose that the sinners themselves admit the being of a God, and yet gratuitously question his omniscience. In the latter case the hotp Would be unmeaning ; in the former, it is the most natural expression of the doubt supposed. An atheist, whether theoretical or practical, would hardly ask, how can God know ? Even a wicked theist would be rather apt to say, he does not know. But nothing can be more appropriate in the mouth of a perplexed and tempted believer than the question, how can God know this and yet suffer it ?

<!-- PAGE 167 -->
12. Loj these are wicked (men), and (yet they are) secure for ever, they increase strength (or suhstance.) These are still the words of the perplexed believer, expressing his surprise at the prosperity of sinners. See, these are wicked men, and yet instead of being wretched, or prospering only for a little while, they are prosperers of eternity, perpetually prospered and at ease, secure from change. See above, on Ps. xxx. 7. Instead of losing what they have, they still gain more, and go on adding to their wealth and to the power which it gives them. See above, on Ps. Ix. 14 (12.)

13. Only (in) vain have I cleansed my heart, and in innocence have washed my hands. These may be taken either indefinitely as the words of any person in the painful situation just described, or more specifically as the words of the psalmist, by whom the whole class was in fact represented. They contain the inference which would be naturally drawn in such a situation, even by a true believer, but one tempted to repine and doubt by the sight of providential enigmas. ' Since then it is the wicked who enjoy God's favour, all my efforts to avoid sin and to do his will have been gratuitous and fruitless.' With the first words of the verse compare Ps. xxxix. 6, 12 (5, 11.)

14. And I have been smitten all the day, and my chastisement (has been inflicted) every morning, literally, at (or in) the mornings. A similar form of expression occurs twice in Job vii. 18. Smitten, literally touched, i  e. by the hand of God, a common expression for affliction, and especially for bodily disease considered as a divine judgment. The same idea was meant to be conveyed by the common version {'plagued.) The psalmist here contrasts his own afflictions with the undisturbed enjoyments of his wicked neighbours. ' While they, though wicked, still increase in wealth and seem secure for ever, I, who have faithfully endeavoured to avoid sin and to do the will of God, am subjected, every day and all day, to privation and distress.'

<!-- PAGE 168 -->
15. If I have said, I will declare thus, behold, the generation of thy sons I have perfidiously treated. This is equivalent to saying, if I did say so, I should be acting falsely towards thy children. It is indeed the only Hebrew form in which such a hypothetical proposition could well be clothed. Said, i. e. to myself, proposed it, formed the purpose. Thus declare, i. e. publicly express my doubts and skeptical misgivings. This, as it has been well observed, the true believer never does, until he is able to announce his conflict and his victory together. Behold or lo is here equivalent to our idiomatic why then, meaning in that case or on that supposition, and expressing at the same time some surprise at his own suggestion as a strange one. The generation of thy sons, the contemporary race of true believers, called the sons of God, not only as the objects of his love, but as partakers of his nature (2 Pet. i. 4.) Treated perfidiously, proved false to them, by weakening the foundation of their hope, instead of strengthening their faith and allaying their misgivings.    See above, on Ps. xxv. 3.

16. And I meditated to know this ; a trouble (was) it in my eyes. Although he abstained from openly expressing what he thought, he still did think, he pondered the whole matter, with a view to understand it, to discover some solution of the mystery, which not only puzzled but distressed him. The apparent inequality of God's providential dealings was a toil, a trouble, an nnhappiness, in his esteem. !58 PSALM  LXXIIl.

<!-- PAGE 169 -->
17. Until I come to the sanctuaries of God, I will consider (or observe) their end. The futures have reference, as in vs. 3, 5, to the date of the anterior experience here recorded. ' But I said to myself, I will wait till I come into God's presence and inquire of him, and then, or in the mean time, I will look at or attend to the end as well as the beginning and the progress of their lives.' The plural form holy places, is the same as in Ps. lxviii. 36 (35.) It denotes the sanctuary in its whole extent, as the earthly residence of Gl-od, and the place where he communed with his people.    See above, on Ps. xxviii. 2.

18. Only in slippery places thou wilt set them, or art setting them, (and now) thou hast let (or made) them fall into destruction. However honourable and happy their position may appear to themselves, the psalmist can see nothing but its danger, as implied in his use of the word only. Smoothnesses, smooth or slippery places, where their foot-hold is precarious and their fall inevitable. He sees God, by his providential favours, placing them in this desired but fearful situation, and then allowing them to drop into destruction. The last word in Hebrew occurs only here and in the next psalm, where it means ruins. If this sense be adopted here, we must suppose a change of figure and an allusion to the fall, not of a man from a slippery precipice, but of a building crumbled by decay or violence.

19. How are they (brought) to desolation as (in) a moment! They have ceased, they are consumed with terrors ! He here expresses his surprise at the abruptness and completeness of their ruin. The meaning of the last clause seems to be, that their very apprehensions were sufficient to destroy them, much more the actual experience of what they apprehended.

20. As a dream on waking, Lord, in waking, their image thou wilt scorn.    The word translated image means an appearance, as PSALM   LXXTII. 159 opposed to the substance or reality. See above, on Ps. xxxix. 7 (6.) The present prosperity of wicked men will seem hereafter, and to God's eye now seems, like an empty dream, worthy only of contemptuous oblivion. The only dubious expression in the verse is that translated waking in the second clause, which is entirely different from the one so rendered in the first clause. The Hebrew phrase ("i^Il) is used in more than fifty other places and in all of them means in the city. See, for example, Ps. lv. 10 (9.) This meaning is retained by some interpreters in the case before us. The reference will then be either to the holy city, as in Ps. lxxii. 16, or to the city where the previous scene is supposed to have been laid, as in Ps. xxxi. 22 (21.) The old interpretation takes the word as an infinitive, from a verb which, however, is always transitive and means to awaken, except perhaps in Job viii. 6 and in Ps. xxxv. 23 above. To this interpretation it is furthermore objected, that it supposes an unusual contraction (WS for WHS), and that the sense which it conveys is an incongruous one. But that God should despise them in the act of waking is, to say the least, as intelligible as that he should despise them in the city. In either case, the general meaning of the sentence is too clear to be mistaken.

<!-- PAGE 170 -->
21. For my heart is soured, and (in or as to) my reins I am pierced. The Hebrew verbs are of the future form, although really relating to past time, which the psalmist's memory recalls as a state of things then likely to continue. See above on vs. 3, 5. The verbs are also properly reflexives, my heart exacerbates itself, I pierce myself, and are perhaps intended to describe his sufferings as the fruit of his own sin and folly.

22. And I (am) brutish and know not (the true state of the case); a beast have I been with thee. The last noun is in the plural number (beasts), as if to signify a beast by way of eminence, in which sense it is literally applied to one of the wonders of the animal kingdom (Job xl. 15.) With the first clause compare Prov. xxx. 2, and see above, on Ps. xlix. 11 (10.) These strong expressions contain an acknowledgment of his own irrationality in questioning God's faithfulness and kindness. In this verse there is an insensible transition from the present to the past, from the ideal to the real time of the events in question. With thee suggests an aggravating circumstance, to wit, that this folly was committed in the presence ot God, and as it were in his society.    See above, on Ps. xviii. 26, 27 (25, 26.)

<!-- PAGE 171 -->
23. And (yet) I (am) still with thee; ttwu hast held (me) by my right hand. Notwithstanding his ungrateful and irrational conduct in God's presence, he had not been driven from it, as he justly might have been. The word translated still properly means always, and denotes that there had been no change or interruption in the previous relation of the parties. There is a perfectly analogous usage of the French toujour s. In the last clause he seems to return to the metaphor with which he set out. As the fatal error which he had escaped is in v. 2 represented as a fall, so here his preservation from it is ascribed to God's having held him up by his right hand. See above, on Ps. xvii. 5. xli. 13 (12.) lxiii. 9 (8.)

24. In (or by) thy counsel thou wilt guide me, and after thou wilt take me. The form of the original is such that it may either express consent or confident expectation ; but the latter in this case really includes the former. By thy counsel, thy instruction and advice, considered as a means of safety ; or in thy counsel, i. e. in the execution of thy plan or purpose, as the end to be accomplished. The last clause is obscure. To the common version (and afterward receive me to glory) it has been objected, that it takes the preposition after as an adverb, and assumes an unusual sense and construction of the verb, and also that it makes the guidance and the glory too distinct and successive.    The con- Btruction whicli it is proposed to substitute is, thou ivilt take me after glory, i. e. make me overtake it, cause me to attain it, bring me to it. The same construction may be made to yield another sense, to wit, after honouring me here thou wilt receive me to thyself, after honour thou wilt take me. This, it is true, is liable to some of the objections brought against the usual construction. But the choice at best is one of difficulties, and some of the objections spring entirely from the wish to exclude a reference to a future state, which, however, is as evident in this verse as it is in vs. 16, 19, if interpreted in any natural and reasonable manner.

<!-- PAGE 172 -->
25. Whom have I in heaven ? And with thee I have not desired (any) upon earth. The literal translation of the first clause is, who (is) to me in heaven, i. e. what protector or provider ? The idea of another besides God may be supplied in -this clause from the next, where with thee can denote either combination or comparison. I have desired none in addition or in preference to thee; thou art alone and all-sufficient.

26. Spent is my flesh and my heart; the rock of my heart and my portion (is) God to eternity. The first clause is by some understood as meaning even if or even when my flesh, etc. But the Psalmist rather assumes the actual occurrence of the extreme case here described, or places himself in it as an ideal situation. Flesh and heart, body and soul, the whole man, or the whole life, outward and inward, bodily and mental. The rock of my heart, the support of my life, that on which it rests as on a solid basis. The idea is not simply that of strength but of a strong foundation. See above, on Ps. xviii. 3 (2.) My portion, the source of my subsistence and my happiness. See above, on Ps. xvi. 5, and with the whole verse compare Job xix. 25—21.

27. For lo, those far from thee shall peHsh ; thou hast destt oytd 162 PSALM  LXXI1T. all (or cvwry one) whoring from thee. This verse assigns his reason for relying upon God and making him his portion. Those far from thee, literally, thy far (ones.) They certainly will perish, for all such have perished heretofore. The union between God and his people being often represented by the figure of a conjugal relation, their violation of the covenant is spoken of as spiritual whoredom or adultery. See above on Ps. xlv. 1, and compare Lev. xx. 6. Num. xiv. 33. In the same sense our Saviour calls the unfaithful Israel of his day a wicked and adulterous generation. See Matt. xii. 39.xvi. 4. Mark viii. 38. The persons threatened with destruction here are not merely sinners in general, but the wicked members of the ancient church or chosen people in particular.

<!-- PAGE 173 -->
28. And I, or as for me—the approach of God to me (is) good; I have placed in the Lord Jehovah my trust, to declare all thy doings. The absolute nominative at the beginning puts himself in strong contrast with the apostates of the foregoing verse. Compare the beginning of vs. 2, 23, above. The nearness or approach of God is an ambiguous expression, as in Isai. lviii. 2, where it may either mean God's drawing near to the people or their drawing near to him. In the case before us both may be implied, as in James iv. 8 both are expressed, Draw nigh to God and he willdraw nigh to you. To me may be connected either with approach, as in Ps. xxvii. 2, or with good, as in v. 1 above. Good is here to be taken in the absolute sense of the summum bonum or chief good. The meaning is not merely that nearness to God is a good thing in itself, or a useful thing to man, but that it comprehends whatever he can wish or hope for. * Let apostates wander far from God and perish ; I am resolved to seek my highest happiness in being near him.' The Lord Jehovah is a combination expressive of God's sovereignty, self-existence, and covenant relation to his people. My trust, my hiding-place or refuge. See above, on Ps. xi. 1.    The last clause shows that he wishes to be PSALM   LXXTV. 163 something more than a mere passive beneficiary. He desires not only to enjoy but to celebrate God's goodness. The word traDSlated doings is applied both to acts and to affairs or business. PSALM  LXXIV.

<!-- PAGE 174 -->
The church prays for deliverance from extreme distress, enforcing the petition, first by a description of the actual state of things, vs. 1—12, and then by an appeal to former mercies, vs. 13—23. The historical occasion is not given, but the terms of the description seem peculiarly appropriate to the state of Judah after the destruction of the temple and the holy city by the Ba bylonians, as described in Jer. lii. 12—34.

1. Maschil. By Asaph. Why, oh God, hast thou cast off forever, smokes thy ivrath at the flock of thy pasture ? The description of the psalm as a didactic one shows that it was not meant to be used in reference to its original occasion merely, but in every emergency resembling it. For this reason the question, what that occasion was, is of little exegetical importance, although not without interest in connection with the critical inquiry as to the date of composition. The state of things assumed, and indeed described, is so unlike that which existed in the time of David, that we must either make the psalm prophetical, which is arbitrary and without analogy, or no less arbitrarily reject the title as a spurious addition to the text, or understand by Asaph the descendants of David's Chief Musician, among whom the gift and office of their ancestor were hereditary.    See above, on Ps

<!-- PAGE 175 -->
1. 1, and compare 2 Chron. xxxv. 15. Ezr. ii. 41. iii. 10. Neh. vii. 44. xi. 22. That this title indicates the author, and not merely the performer, can only be inferred from the general fact, that where a single name is given it is usually that of the writer. See above on Ps. xlii. 1. lxxii. ]. The interrogation in this verse does not involve a disavowal of guilt or ill-desert, but is rather a passionate expostulation and indirect petition for deliverance. Cast off, a verb implying abhorrence and disgust. See above, on Ps. xliii. 2. xliv. 10, 24 (9, 23.) lx. 3, 12 (1, 10.) As the object is easily supplied, namely, us or thy people, its omission adds to the strength of the expression. Cast off forever, as it seems to us and others. Why hast thou cast us off with what appears to be a final and perpetual rejection ? See above, on Ps. xiii. 2 (1.) The interrogation is continued throughout the sentence. (Why) smokes or will smoke? The future form suggests the same idea as the forever in the other clause. ' Why is thy wrath to continue smoking ?' The presence of smoke presupposes that of fire ; but the former is particularly mentioned, perhaps for the purpose of adding to the primary idea of distress or destruction the secondary one of gloom and terror. At or against thy people, literally, in, among them. See below on Ps. lxxx. 5 (4), and compare Deut. xxix. 19 (20.) The sheep (or flock) of thy pasture, those who feed upon thy pasture, or are fed by thee, a favourite designation of the chosen people, as the occupants of the Land of Promise. The figurative form of the description was originally furnished by the pastoral experience of David, but from him was borrowed by other sacred writers. See below, Ps. lxxix. 13. c. 3.

2. Remember thy congregation thou hast purchased of old (and) redeemed the rod of thine inheritance, this Mount Zion thou hast dwelt in. The ellipsis of the relative in both the clauses of this verse is common to the Hebrew and the English idiom. The word translated congregation is one of those applied in the Old Testament to Israel as an organized body and the people of Jeho van. See above, on Ps. i. 5. Purchased, acquired, made thine own. The word translated of old is a noun meaning antiquity, but here used as an adverb of time. The full phrase occurs below in v. 12. The next verb contains a specification of the first, to wit, that he purchased by redeeming them from bondage, with particular reference to the exodus from Egypt. The rod of thine inheritance is a phrase which, to any Hebrew reader, would suggest the twofold idea of a chieftain's staff, the badge of authority in the several tribes, and that of a measuring rod, here put for the portion of land measured. The whole sense conveyed by these associations is that of a definite province, with its population, of which God is the possessor and the sovereign. The last clause applies what had been said of the people and the land still more specifically to the central point of the theocracy. Mount Zion may be understood as a description of the whole of Jerusalem, including the temple upon Mount Moriah. This Mount Zion, with which the speakers were familiar, and at or near which they are supposed to be speaking. The explanation of this as a relative is gratuitous, nor could the idea (this Mount Zion) have been well expressed in any other form of Hebrew words. The grand distinction of Mount Zion, in the wide sense just explained, was the inhabitation of Jehovah, which is therefore here expressly mentioned in the closing words.

<!-- PAGE 176 -->
3. Lift thy steps to the perpetual ruins, all the enemy has ill done in the holy place. The first phrase is a poetical expression meaning simply advance, draw near, for the purpose of inspection. The word translated ruins occurs only here and in Ps. lxxiii. 18. The whole phrase strictly means ruins of perpetuity, i. e. such as appear likely to continue forever, and will certainly do so, unless God comply with this request to draw near. The construction of the second clause adopted by some writers, the enemy has destroyed all (or every thing) in the holy place, is scarcely grammatical To express that idea, the word all would have the article, as in Ps. xiv. 3, or a suffix, as in Ps. xxix. 9, whereas its intimate connection here with the following verb in Hebrew is equivalent to a relative construction. Ill done, injured or destroyed, done mischief.

<!-- PAGE 177 -->
4. Thine adversaries have roared in the midst of thine assembly ; they have set their signs (as) signs. The tumultuous violence of the destroyers is described in the first clause by a figure borrowed from the habits of wild beasts, and elsewhere used as an expression of extreme distress. See above, on Ps. xxii. 2(1.) xxxii. 3. xxxviii. 9 (S.) The word translated assembly is not the same that is rendered congregation in v. 2, but one that strictly means a meeting by mutual agreement or appointment, and is specially applied to the meeting between God and his people at the sanctuary, which was therefore designated in the law as the tent of meeting [iVlto b«li*)j not merely the tent where the people assembled, but the place where they met with God by previous appointment. See Ex. xxv. S. xxix. 42, 43, 45, 46. Xum. xvii. 19 (4.) The ideas suggested by the etymology and usage of the Hebrew noun are those of previous appointment, the act of meeting consequent upon it, the persons met, and the place where they assemble. The full sense therefore of the phrase here used is,' in the midst of thy people assembled at the appointed time and place to meet thee ' The exclusive local meaning put by some upon the words is quite gratuitous. The plural form which some assume (thine assemblies) varies the meaning only by suggesting the idea of repeated convocations, ' in the midst of thy people, whenever (or as often as) they meet thee thus,' but without at all conveying the idea of numerous or even different places. Set, fixed, established; or set up, exhibited, exposed to view. See above, on Ps. xviii. 44 (43.) xxxix. 9 (S.) xliv. 14, 15 (13, 14.) The common version of the last words, ensigns for signs, conveys i false impression of the form of the original, in which tho two PSALM   LXX1V. 1(57 nouns are identical. The word signs does not necessarily denote either military or religious ensigns, but rather signifies in general the insignia of sovereignty. For all that once marked the presence and authority of God the impious enemy had substituted the signs or tokens of their own ascendancy. In other words, they had usurped God's place in his very sanctuary, the spot which he had chosen for his earthly residence.

<!-- PAGE 178 -->
5. He is known (or shall be known) as (one) raising on high, in the thicket of the wood, axes. The most probable sense of this obscure verse is as follows : the ruthless enemy is known or recognised as dealing with the sanctuary no more tenderly than a woodman with the forest which he fells. On high seems to be added to suggest the force of the blow and the sweep of the arm which deals it. The thicket may be mentioned for the purpose of contrasting the delicate and complicated wood-work of the temple with the worthless undergrowth which the woodman cuts away without scruple or discrimination. The word translated wood ia often used as a collective meaning trees.

6. And noio the carvings thereof together (or at once) with sledge and hammers they heat (down). This completes the comparison begun in the preceding verse, with which the one before us is connected by the phrase and now, i. e. in this case. As in the case supposed the woodman deals with trees and thickets, so in the real case the spoiler deals with the costly fruits of art and skill. The word translated carvings is expressly used in the description of the temple. See 1 Kings vi. 29, and compare Ex xxviii. 11. xxxix. 6. The suffix (thereof) has no grammatical antecedent in the sentence ; the form was probably determined by a word not expressed though present to the writer's mind. At once does not mean quickly, suddenly, without delay, but all to gether, indiscriminately, in confusion.

<!-- PAGE 179 -->
7. They have set on fire thy holy place ; to the, earth they ham profaned the dwelling of thy name. The literal translation of the first clause is, they have sent (or cast) into the fire thy holy place. The construction in the last clause is a pregnant one, profaned to the earth, i. e. profaned by casting to the ground a sacred edifice This form of expression would be inappropriate to mere profana tion by defilement, without actual prostration of the edifice itself.

8. They have said in their heart, let us destroy them together (or at once) ; they have burned all the assemblies of God in the land, by burning the only place where such assemblies could be held (Deut. xii. 5, 11.) Others, with less probability, suppose that the Hebrew word itself denotes the place of assembly, and that all such places means the only such place. The translation synagogues has no authority from Hebrew usage, or the ancient versions (LXX. hor&g Vulg. dies festos. Jer. solennitates), and has been abused to prove that the psalm was written after the Babylonish exile, before which synagogues are commonly supposed to have had no existence.

9. Our signs we see not; there is no more (any) prophet, and (there is) not with us (any one) knowing until what time, or how long, these things are to last. By signs we are here to understand the tokens of God's presence and of Israel's peculiar relation to him. One of these is then specified, to wit, the gift of prophecy, which seemed to cease at the time of the Babylonian conquest, although afterwards renewed. Even Jeremiah's ministry may be considered as then closing. The complaint of this, as of a recent loss, shows that the period meant is not that of the persecutions under Antioehus Epiphanes, when the gift of prophecy had been withdrawn for many generations.

JL). Till when, oh God, shall the foe revile, the enemy contemn thy -tuime forever ?    By making the last clause a distinct interro- PSALM   LXX1V.  * laa gation {shall the enemy despise thy name forever ?) we avoid tho solecism of combining how long and forever ; but this can occasion no more difficulty here than in v. 1 and in Ps. xiii. 2(1.) The verb in the last clause means to treat contemptuously, to show contempt by word or deed. Blaspheme expresses only one mode of doing this, and that too strongly.

<!-- PAGE 180 -->
11. Why wilt thou withdraw thy hand and thy right hand 1 From the midst of thy bosom (draw it and) consume (them.) The future here includes the present (why dost thou withdraw thy hand!) with the additional idea of continuance or perseverance in so doing. The hand, and especially the right hand, is the seat and symbol of strength. The and between them is equivalent to the English even. To make the hand return, or draw it back, is to cease from action, the continuance of which cessation is do scribed as hiding it in the bosom.

12. And God (is) my king of old, working salvations in w*. midst of the land. Having pleaded the greatness of the dangei and distress, as a reason for implormg the divine interposition, the church now pleads her covenant relation to him as her Sovereign and her Saviour in former emergencies, with particular reference to the plagues of Egypt, which makes it probable that land and not earth is the true translation of the last word. The very form of expression is borrowed from the narrative of Moses. See Ex. viii. 18 (22.) Doing, working, as opposed to a mere promise or prediction. The participle signifies continued action, and extends the description beyond the particular occasion specially referred to. God is described as He who, then and ever, works salvations or deliverances, the plural form implying fulness and variety. See above, on Ps xviii. 51 (50.) xxviii. S. xlii. % 12(5, 11.) xliii. 5. liii. 7.

13. Thou hast burst, with thy strength, the sea ; thou hast broken the heads of dragons on the water. The word translated dragons is applied to the largest class of aquatic animals. Some suppose these to be here emblematic of Egypt and other hostile powers, as in Ez. xxix.. 3, 4. Isai. li. 9, 10. Others, with more probability, explain the verse as a description of God's power over nature, and particularly over the sea, as specially manifested in the passage of the Red Sea. The dragons or sea-monsters are then added merely to complete the picture. As if he had said, ' thou hast subdued and crushed the sea and its most terrible inhabitants.' This is described as taking place, not in or under the waters, the abode of the sea-monsters, but on the surface, where the contest becomes visible. The pronoun at the beginning \9 emphatic : ' it is thou that hast done all this, and not another.'

<!-- PAGE 181 -->
14. (It is) thou (that) hast crushed the heads of Leviathan, (that) wilt give him (as) food to the people, to the ivild men, or the dwellers in the desert. See above, on Ps. lxxii. 9. Leviathan, according to its etymology, denotes a coiled or crooked serpent, but like dragon in v. 13, is used as a generic term for huge aquatic animals. Having no plural form, it is here used in a collective sense, as appears from the expression heads, unless we understand this as denoting a many-headed monster, to which, however, there is no analogy in Scripture. In the last clause, people seems to mean men in general, and is then rendered definite by the use of the specific term which follows. By the people of the desert some understand the savage beasts, by whom the Egyptians were devoured after the overthrow of Pharaoh ; others, with more probability, the wild men living on the shores of the Red Sea, and subsisting on its fish, and hence called by the Greeks the Ichthyophagi. The transition from the past tense to the future geems to represent the scene as actually passing, or the act as one that may be frequently repeated. ' It is thou that hast done all this and wilt do it again.'

<!-- PAGE 182 -->
15. (It is) thou (that) didst cleave fount and flood, (that) didst dry up rivers ever-flowing. Fountain and flood is a kind of proverbial expression for smaller and greater bodies of water. The primary historical allusion here is to the passage of the Jordan. The original construction of the last phrase is streams of perpetuity, perennial or unfailing streams, as distinguished from the winter torrents of the Holy Land, which disappear in summer. The common version, rivers of strength or mighty rivers, is not sustained by etymology or usage.

16. To thee (belongs) day, yea, to thee night; thou hast prepared light and sun. From the mention of God's actual control over the elements, as exercised in certain memorable cases, the Psalmist here proceeds to assert his sovereignty by right of creation. Not only day but night, which seems to sense beyond the reach of government or regulation, is subject to God's power Thou, and no other, as in the three preceding verses. Prepared for the place which they now fill and the work which they perform. Light and sun are related as the genus and the species, like hand and right hand in v. 11, signs and prophet in v. 9. Light, in the local sense of luminary, which the same Hebrew word has in Gen. i. 14—16.

17. Thou hast set (or established) all the bounds of earth ; summer and winter—thou hast formed them. This is the seventh emphatic repetition of the pronoun thou. The bounds of earth are supposed by some to be the limits of the land, by which it is separated from the sea. See above, on Ps. xxir. 2. The description of God's power over nature is comple;ed by referring to it the revolution of the seasons as not only appointed but created bj him. He is not only the ordainer of the change itself, but the author of the causes which produce it.

18. Remember this ; an"enemy has reviled Jehovah, and a fvol- 172 PSALM   LWIV. nh people /iavc contemned thy name. For the meaning of the verb? see above, on v. 10, where the same facts are alleged, but are here recalled to God's remembrance as a icason for his interposition. Jehovah may also be construed as a vocative, which makes the parallelism more exact. Foolish, in the strong sense of that word, as used in Scripture, to denote the irrationality of sin. See above, on Ps. xiv. 1, and compare Deut. xxxii. 6, from which place the whole phrase is borrowed.

<!-- PAGE 183 -->
19. Give not to the greedy herd thy turtle-dove : the herd of thy afflicted {ones) forget not forever! The general import of this prayer is obvious, and the only doubtful point is the precise sense of the word (ft*n) twice translated herd above. It usually means an animal or living thing, and more especially a wild beast, as distinguished from domesticated cattle. This would yield a good sense in the first clause (greedy beast), but is inadmissible in the other. The same objection lies against the explanation of the first as meaning life and the last as meaning flock. The only meaning equally admissible in both parts of the sentence is the one just mentioned, that of animal collectively, and then a flock or herd of animals, from which it is sometimes transferred to human subjects. See above, on Ps. lxviii. 11 (10.) Greedy herd, literally, herd of appetite. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 12. xli. 3 (2.) The turtle-dove is here used as an emblem of innocence and helplessness, as well as an expression of affectionate endearment.

20. Look to the covenant; for filled are the darknesses of earth with homes of violence (or cruelly.) The prayer in the first clause is equivalent to saying, Remember thy promise, fulfill thy covenant engagements. The reason assumed is, that the existing state of things is such as to require this fulfilment. The word translated darknesses has the form of a local noun, and may therefore mean dark places, not in the sense of hiding places, but in that of gloomy dismal places.    The same idea, of distress and gloom, which is always included in the sense of the word elsewhere, may be obtained by making it an abstract, darkness, or supposing the plural form to be emphatic, profound darkness, not as an attribute of certain places, but of the whole earth. As if he had said, the darkness of the earth, or this dark world, is filled with homes of cruelty. This word (cfcn), here as elsewhere, comprehends the two ideas of injustice and violence. See above, on Ps. vii. 17 (16.) xviii. 49 (48.) The use of the word homes (or habitations) indicates that violence or cruelty is there domesticated, permanently resident. See above, on Ps. xxv. 13. The meaning of the whole verse, thus explained, is, that the permanent establishment and prevalence of " wrong and outrage" in the darkness of the world may be urged as a reason for the fulfilment of God's promise, nay, his solemn oath, that the whole earth shall be filled with his glory (Num. xiv. 21.)

<!-- PAGE 184 -->
21. Let not the oppressed turn back confounded; let the sufferer and the poor (man) praise thy name. The word translated oppressed means strictly broken, bruised, or crushed. See above, on Ps. ix. 10 (9.) x. 18. Turn back, abandun his pursuit, retire in despair. Confounded, disappointed, put to shame, by the frustration of his hopes and wishes. See above, on Ps. xxxv. 4. xl. 15 (14.) lxix. 7 (6.) lxx. 3 (2.)

22. Arise, oh God ! Plead thine own cause ! Remember thy reviling by the fool all day ! The first prayer is the common one, that God would put an end to his apparent inaction and indifference to the sufferings of his servants. See above, on Ps. iii. S (7.) vii. 7 (6.) ix. 20 (19.) x. 12. xvii. 13. xxxv. 2. xliv. 27 (26.) Plead thine own cause, literally, strive thy strife. Sec above, on Ps xliii. 1. ' Remember how thou art reviled by the irrational transgressor, and arouse thyself to silence his reproaches ?

<!-- PAGE 185 -->
23. Forget not the voice of thy foes, the noise of thy assailants, ascending always. The voice and noise here meant are the clamorous revilings and blasphemies of wicked men, continually going up into the ears of God, and calling down his wrath upon them. This striking figure, representing gross sin as a vocal and ludiblo witness against him who commits it, is a common one in Scripture from the earliest books downwards. See Gen. iv. 10. xviii. 21. xix. 13, and compare Jon. i. 2. Thy assailants, or more literally, thy insurgents, those who rise up against thee, in the way not only of attack but of rebellion. See above, on Ps. iii. 2 (1.) xviii. 40, 49 (39, 48.) xliv. 6 (5), and compare Ex. xv. 7. Deut. xxxiii. 11. 2 Sam. xxii. 49. All this the Psalmist, or rather the Church, in whose behalf he speaks, recalls to the divine remembrance, as a ground or reason for immediate interference.
