<!-- psalm 76 | vol 2 | scan pages 186-191 -->

<!-- PAGE 186 -->
moreover indicated by the phrase al-tashheth, or destroy not. See above, on Ps. lvii. 1.

2 (1.) We give thanks to thee, oh God, we give thanks ; and near (is) thy name; they recount thy wonders. The thanksgiving is in anticipation of some great event, and implies a strong faith in the certainty of its occurrence. Thy name is near, a signal manifestation of thine attributes is just at hand, so that men begin already to recount thy wondrous works, as if actually past.    Or

»this may mean that they recount God's former dealings with them, as a reason for expecting like or greater things to come. Another construction of the last clause, perhaps still more natural, is that adopted in the English Bible : thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare. For the sense and usage of the last word in Hebrew, see above, on Ps. ix. 2 (1.) xxvi. 7. xl. 6 (5.) lxxi. 17.

3 (2.) For I will take a set time; I will equitably judge. The best interpreters are now in favour of explaining these as the words of God himself, containing the promise upon which was built the hope expressed in the preceding verse. Take then includes the two ideas of choosing and using for the end proposed. The word translated set time is the same that means assembly in Ps. lxxiv. 4, 8. The idea of constituted time, which is included even there, is here predominant. The same use of the word occurs in Ps. cii. 14 (13.) Hab. ii. 3. Dan. viii. 19. xi. 27, 35. There is here an obvious allusion to the stated times at which justice is publicly administered. Compare Acts xix. 38. As if he had said, I will appoint a time, and when it comes, I will ascend the judgment-seat. The parties to be tried are the foes and oppressors of Grod's people. The pronoun is emphatic ; I, and no other, will be judge. See above, on Ps. 1. 6. Equitably, literally, equities or rectitudes. See above on Ps. xvii. 2. lviii 2(1.) The use of the plural, as an abstract, and that of the noun in an adverbial sense, are both familiar Hebrew idioms. The judging of the wicked at God's bar implies their condemnation, and, as a necessary consequence, the deliverance of those whom they oppress or injure.

<!-- PAGE 187 -->
4 (3.) Melted (are) the earth and all dwelling on it; I have weighed the 'pillars of it. Selah. Dissolved with fear, enfeebled, or reduced to nothing. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 7 (6.) The figure in the last clause is obscure. The act of weighing may be intended to suggest that of raising, bearing up. Compare Isai xl. 12, 13, 15. Some suppose, however, that it means to measure, estimate, or value, and implies not only perfect knowledge but creative power. As a part of the promise or encouraging assurance begun in the preceding verse, the one before us must mean that God himself will prevent or rectify the evils caused or threatened by his enemies.

5 (4.) I said to the boasters. Boast not, and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn ! Some regard these as the words of the psalmist, speaking again in the person of the church. The sense will then be that, encouraged by God's promise of protection and deliverance, his people warn their adversaries not to triumph. It seems more natural, however, to explain them as a continuation of the words of God himself, whose very assurance of protection to his people was in fact a warning of destruction to his enemies. The objection, that what follows must then be referred to the same speaker, is of little weight, as the transition from one person to another, in the psalms of a dramatic structure, is not commonly a marked one, and is often quite insensible. The concluding metaphor is borrowed from the habits of horned animals, and nearly equivalent to the act of holding the head high, as a sign of human pride. For a different application of the figure, see above, on Ps. xviii. 3 (2.)

<!-- PAGE 188 -->
6 (5.) Do not raise on high your horn (and) speak with a proud neck, or speak with (outstretched) neck proudly. The last word is an adjective meaning insolent or arrogant. See above, on Ps. xxxi. 19 (18.) It may either agree with neck, and signify a position and carriage of the neck indicative of pride (Ps. lxxiii. 6) or constitute the object of the verb, in which case with the neck may mean with outstretched or prolonged neck, not projecting forwards but inclining backwards. See Isai. iii. 16, and compare Job xv. 26 in Hebrew. For a similar ellipsis, see below, Ps lxxvii. 16 (15.)

7 (6.) For not from east, and (not) from west, and not from the wilderness of mountains, is the judgment on these sinners to proceed, but from a very different quarter. The word translated east means properly the sunrise, or rather the place of his coming forth ; the parallel term the sunset, or the place of evening. A third point of the compass is denoted by the wilderness, the great Arabian desert lying to the south of Palestine. The last word in Hebrew (fi^fi) admits of two entirely different explanations. One of these, given in the English Bible, makes it the infinitive of the verb translated raise in vs. 5, 6 (4, 5), and supposes it to mean the act of raising, or a state of exaltation. The sense will then be that promotion cometh not from any quarter upon earth, but from God and God alone. Others object that the question here is not one of promotion but of judgment, as appears from the foregoing and the following context. Thev accordingly adhere to the ancient versions in making (S^n) the plural of the common Hebrew word for hill or mountain, and explain the whole phrase to mean a hilly desert or a wilderness of mountains, a description eminently applicable to Idumaea and Arabia Petraea. The essential idea is still that of the south, here added to the east and west, as a general description of the countries contiguous to Palestine. The south is mentioned last, perhaps for the sake of an emphatic reference to Egypt, as the 17s PSALM   LXXV. foreign power, on which the Jews were supposed by the Assyrians to rely with special confidence. Compare Isai. xxxvi. 4—6. The omission of the north may either be fortuitous or (as some suppose) intended to suggest that this was the quarter from which the hostile incursion had proceeded, as it was in fact, invaders even from the furthest east commonly entering the country from that side. The meaning of the whole verse then is that the danger which impended from one quarter could not be averted by mere human aid from any other, but only by the means referred to in the next verse.

<!-- PAGE 189 -->
8 (7.) For God (is) judge (or actually judging ;) this (one) he will humble, and this (one) will exalt. The for at the beginning introduces the reason of the negative statement in the verse preceding. It is not man, for it is God, who can perform this. The same relation of the sentences is commonly expressed in our idiom by but. The act of judging, or the oflice of a judge, here implies absolute sovereignty. This and this is the idiomatic Hebrew phrase answering to one and another in English. See above, tfn Ps. xx. S (7.)

9 (8.) For a cup (is) in the hand of Jehovah, and the wine ferments, and it is full of mixture, and he pours out from this (cup) ; only its dregs shall they wring (or suck) out, shall they drink—all the wicked of the earth (or land.) This is a common figure in the Scriptures for the wrath of God. See above, on Ps. xi. 6. The cup contains the prescribed or allotted portion of the sinner to whom it is administered. Ferments or has fermented, implying that it is real wine and strong wine. The translation it is red is now supposed to rest upon a doubtful etymology. Some interpreters explain the phrase, it foams with wine ; but this construction is not only in itself less simple, but puts a sense upon the verb not entirely authorized by usage, and requires the noun (D13) cup, which is elsewhere feminine, to be construed as a masculine.    It (the wine) is full of mixture, i'. e. mixed with spices to increase its strength and stimulating power. Only its dregs is an idiomatic Hebrew phrase, which does not mean, as it may seem to do in English, that they shall drink nothing but the dregs. The meaning rather is, that they shall have nothing left for it, no resource, or no alternative, except to drain the cup to the very dregs, i. e. to suffer God's wrath to the uttermost (1 Thess. ii. 16.) The position given to the subject of the sentence at its close makes it more emphatic.    See above on Ps. xl. 15 (14.)

<!-- PAGE 190 -->
10 (9.) And I will declare forever, I will sing praise to the God of Jacob. The emphatic pronoun puts him in opposition to the wicked of the earth or land. i While they are thus destroyed, I will declare' etc. The object of the verb in the first clause is determined by the second. Sing praise, make music, as a means of celebrating the divine praise. See above, on Ps. ix. 12 (11.) sxx. 5 (4.) xlvii. 7 (6.) Ixvi. 4. To the God of Jacob, to him rcho has proved himself to be such, by fulfilling the promise made :>f old to Israel. The personal name of the patriarch is poetically substituted for the one which properly belonged to him as Founder of the nation.    See above, on Ps. xxiv. 6.

11 (10.) And all horns of wicked ones will I cut off; lifted up shall be the horns of the righteous. The same noun and verb, that were used in vs. 5, 6 (4, 5), to denote the self-exaltation of the wicked, are here used in a good sense to denote God's gracious exaltation of the righteous. Compare Matth. xxiii. 12. Luke xiv. 11. xviii. 14. In the first clause, to the simple correlative idea of humiliation is superadded that of violent destruction. While the horns of the righteous are to be exalted, those of the wicked are not only to be lowered but cut off. The change from the plural (wicked men) to the singular (a righteous man), if meant to be significant at all, may have reference to the speaker as in ideal individual.    The construction of these words as thosa 180 PSALM  LXX^VI of God himself is a gratuitous and harsh one. They are iathei uttered by the Church, as representing him, or acting In his strength and under his authority.

<!-- PAGE 191 -->
1. To the Chief Musician. With (or on) stringed instruments. A Psalm by Asaph. A song (of praise.) The resemblance of this title to that of the preceding psalm, their juxtaposition in the Psalter, and their internal similarity, all favour the opinion that they had respect originally to the same historical occasion, with this difference, that the first is rather an anticipation of the great deliverance as certain but still future, and the other a commemoration of the same as actually past or really experienced. In this, as in the other case, the event is ascribed to a wonderful divine interposition, and described as one affecting the whole world or the nations generally, which was emphatically true of the great Btroke, by which the power of Assyria was broken.

2. (1.) Known in Judah (is) God ; in Israel great (is) his name. Known as God, and as the God of Israel, his chosen people, which, after the great schism in the time of Rehoboam, continued to exist in the kingdom of Judah. It was only in the ancient church that Lis name was fully known, his perfections clearly manifested.

3 (2.) And in Salem was his tabernacle, and his home in Zion This is explanatory of the first verse. He was best known there because it was his chosen earthly residence. Salem is evidently used poetically for Jerusalem.    The former name means peaceful
