<!-- psalm 77 | vol 2 | scan pages 192-197 -->

<!-- PAGE 192 -->
md secure, and some suppose it to be one of the elements of which the other name is composed, so as to signify a peaceful or secure possession. The same interpreters identify the Salem of Gen. xiv. 18 with Jerusalem. The word translated tabernacle properly means a booth or shed composed of leaves and branches, in allusion to the moveable and temporary form of the first sanctuary.

4 (3.) Thither he shattered the bolts of the boto—buckler and sicord and battle. Selah. Some translate the first word there, but there is no clear instance of the Hebrew adverb being so used, and the best interpreters suppose the sense to be, that he destroyed them on their way there, while in motion towards the Holy City. The word (1SE3) translated shattered is an intensive species of the common verb (^~?) to break. Both forms occur together in Ps. xxix. 5. See also Ps. iii. 8 (7.) The ambiguous word bolts is used to represent a Hebrew one, which properly means thunderbolts or flashes of lightning, but is here applied to the flight of arrows, with or without allusion to the practice of igniting them (Eph. vi. 16.) To the shield and sword, as the most important pieces of defensive and offensive armour, he adds, by a bold and striking figure, war itself, perhaps as a residuary aggregate of all other arms and weapons.

5 (4.) Bright (art) thou, glorious, more than the mountains of prey. The object of address is God, who had been previously spoken of, in the third person. The first word in Hebrew is a participle, meaning illuminated, made to shine, and therefore bearing some affinity to our word illustrious. The other epithet means grand, glorious, sublime. See above, on Ps. viii. 1. The common version (excellent) seems to restrict the praise to moral qualities. As mountains are standing symbols of states and kingdoms, mountains of prey, i. e. mountains occupied by robbers, may denote oppressive powers, such as that of Assyria, tc which the Prophets apply similar descriptions. See Nah. ii. 11, 12. iii. 1. To all such hostile powers God is here represented as superior.

<!-- PAGE 193 -->
6 (5.) Spoiled are the stout of heart; ihey have slept their shep ; and all the men of might have not found their hands. The meaning of the first clause seems to be, that the spoilers are themselves spoiled, by a signal providential retribution. Some, however, explain the first word to mean snatched away, caused to disappear or vanish. They have slept their own sleep, i. e. they, like others, in their turn, sleep the sleep of death. See above, on Ps. xiii. 4 (3), and compare Nah. iii. 18. 2 Kings xix. 35 Stout of heart suggests the two distinct ideas, courageous and hard-hearted. The same expression is used, in an unfavourable sense, by Isaiah (xivi. 12.) All have not found does not imply that some have found, but on the contrary, that none have found, or in other words that the negative poposition is true of all without exception. Found their hands is understood by some to mean regained their strength. But the direct sense of the words is, that they have not found the use of their hands, or been able to employ them with advantage.

7 (6.) At thy rebuke, oh God of Jacob, put to sleep (is) both chariot and horse. The particle at the beginning is both temporal and causal, post hoc et propter hoc. After and because of thy rebuke. This noun denotes not merely a verbal but a real or practical expression of the divine displeasure. See above, on Ps ix. 6 (5.) lxviii. 31 (30.) God of Jacob, see, above, on v. 10 (9.) Put to sleep is here used to translate a passive participle, denoting not a mere state or condition, but the violence by which it is produced. The sleep meant is of course the sleep of death. The application of this figure to the chariot as well as to the horse, is less paradoxical in Hebrew, where the noun used is sometimes a collective meaning cavalry.    See my note on Isaiah xxi. 7. PSALM   LXXVT 183 A.t the same time, there is beauty in  the figure, as suggesting that the noisy rattle of the wheels is hushed in death-like silence.

<!-- PAGE 194 -->
8 (7.) Thou (art) to be feared, (even) thou, and who shall stand before thee, when once thou art angry ? The Hebrew passive participle often has the force of the future passive or gerundive in Latin. See above, on Ps. xviii. 4 (3.) The repetition of the pronoun makes it highly emphatic and even exclusive, thou and no other, thou and only thou. Who shall stand? includes the kindred question, who may or can stand? To stand before God means, in this connection, to stand one's ground in opposition to him, or in independence of him. See above, on Ps. i. 5. The common version of the last words, which is retained above, conveys correctly the idea, but without the peculiar form of the original, which is highly idiomatic, and not susceptible of literal translation. The last word strictly means thy anger and the one before it from then or from that time. The nearest approach to it in English would be since thy anger, a construction which is actually given in the latest German versions.

9 (8.) From heaven thou hast caused judgment to be heard ; the earth feared and rested, or, the earth was afraid and was still. From his throne in heaven God had pronounced judgment on his wicked enemies, the sound of which had struck the dwellers upon earth with awe and calmed their tumult. The last Hebrew verb is especially applied to repose after the noise and agitation of war.    See Josh. xiv. 15.  Judg. v. 31. Isai. xiv 7.

10 (9.) In Godh arising for the judgment, to save all the humble of the earth. This completes the sentence begun in the preceding verse, by assigning the date, and at the same time the cause, of the effect there recorded. The earth was awe-struck and reduced to silence when God arose to judgment, i. e. to act as judge or sovereign arbiter.    Tn the last clause, as in many other places, the judgments of God upon his enemies are repre* sented as occasions of deliverance to his people, here described by one of their characteristic qualities, not merely as the meek in temper, but as the lowly in spirit, the humble in the strong religious sense. See above, on Ps. ix. 13 (12.) x. 12,17. xxii. 27 (26.) xxv. 9. xxxiv. 3 (2.) xxxvii. 11. lxix. 33 (32.) The last word in the verse has here a kind of double sense, since the promise made directly to the humble of the land, i. e. the spiritual Israel, was really intended to include all the humble of the earth, i. e. all the truly pious, whether Jews or Gentiles.

<!-- PAGE 195 -->
11 f 10.) For the wrath of man shall praise inee (or acknowledge thee.) ; the remainder of wraths thou shalt gird (about thee.) The very passions which excite men to rebel against God shall be used as instruments and means of coercion. See above, on Ps. xxxii. 9. And so complete shall be this process, that even the remnant of such passionate excitement, which might be expected to escape attention, will be nevertheless an instrument or weapon in the hands of God. This last idea is expressed by the figure of a girdle, here considered as a sword-belt. So too in other cases the verb to gird is absolutely used in the sense of girding on a sword, or the still more general one of arming one's self. See above, on Ps. xlv. 4 (3), and compare Judg. xviii. 11. 1 Kings xx. 11.2 Kings iii. 21. Others, with less probability, suppose the figure to denote the act of attaching to one's self, as in Ps. cix. 19. Isai. xi. 5. Jer. xiii. 11, and apply it to the future conversion of all remaining enemies. The plural in the last clause (wraths or angers) seems to be an emphatic designation of abundance or excess.    See above, on. Ps. xviii. 51 (50.)

12 (11.) Vow and pay unto Jehovah your God, all (ye that are) round about him ; let them bring tribute to the Dread ( One.) The first clause may be understood to mean, pay now what you have vowed before, i. e. before the great deliverance and during the impending danger. The addition of your God shows that the object of address is Israel. Compare Deut. xxiii. 22 (21.) According to the raasoretic interpunction, all that are round about him belongs to the first clause, and denotes the host of Israel, in the midst of whom Jehovah's tent was pitched (Num. ii. 2.) The English Bible, following the ancient versions, throws these words into the last clause, as the subject of the verb that follows, let all that are round about him bring presents, or they shall bring presents. This last word in Hebrew denotes tribute from the conquered or dependent to the conqueror or sovereign. See above, on Ps. lxviii. 30 (29), and compare Isai. xviii. 7. This was literally verified in the case of Hezekiah's rescue from the power of Sennacherib. See 2 Chron. xxxii. 23. God is here called Fear or Terror, as an object to be reverenced or dreaded. Compare the similar expressions in Isaiah viii. 12, 13.

<!-- PAGE 196 -->
13 (12.) He cuts off the spirit of princes, he is feared (or to Ik feared) by the kings of earth. The first verb is spe-cially applied to the pruning or cutting of vines. See Jer. vi. 9. xxv. 30. xlix. 9, and compare Rev. xiv. 18, 19. Its future form includes a potential sense. He can do it when he will, and he will do it when he sees occasion. Spirit or breath is here put for the life or vital principle, to cut which is to kill. He who possesses this alarming power is or ought to be an object of religious fear, not only to ordinary men or to certain great men in particular, but to all the kings of the earth. Compare Matt. x. 28. Luke xii. 6. These expressions show that the historical occasion of the psalm was not an event of merely local interest, but a great his* torical and national catastrophe, such as the blow inflicted on th« power of Assyria by the sudden destruction of Sennacherib's host i8fi PSALM   LXXV1. PSALM  LXXVIT.

<!-- PAGE 197 -->
1. Tc the Chief Musician over (the choir or family of) Aiduthun. By Asaph, A Psalm. For the meaning of this title, see above, on Ps. lxii. 1. The psalm before us contains a complaint and prayer of the ancient church in times of deep distress. It consists of two parts. In the first, the church describes her sad condition and complains of God's desertion, vs. 2—10 (1—9.) In the second, she encourages herself by the remembrance of former deliverances, and especially of that from Egypt, vs. 11— 21 (10—20.) The particular historical occasion is not specified ; but if, as some suppose, it be the crisis of affairs in the reign of Josiah, the name Asaph must be understood as a description of the family, and not of its progenitor. See above on Ps. 1. 1. There are several obvious imitations of this psalm in the third chapter of Habakkuk.

2 vl ) My voice unto God (I will raise) and will cry ; my voice unto God (I will raise) and he will give ear to me. Some make the last verb an imperative, and (when I raise my voice) do thou give ear. But besides the sudden change of person, which, though common, is not to be assumed without necessity, the form of the Hebrew verb is that of an infinitive, to be determined by assimilation to the one before it. The last clause then really assigns a reason for the purpose expressed in the first. He would not pray, if he despaired of being heard.
