<!-- psalm 84 | vol 2 | scan pages 258-265 -->

<!-- PAGE 258 -->
pare 1 Sam. xvii. 46. 2 Kings xix. 19. Isai. xxx\ii. 16,20. The original construction is peculiar : i they shall know that thou— thy name Jehovah—thou alone—art Most High over all the earth.' The simple pronoun thou, is explained and amplified by the addition of the words, thy name Jehovah, i. e. thou who hast revealed thyself already as the self-existent and eternal God, and as the covenant God of Israel. PSALM   LXXXIY.

1. To the Chief Musician. On (or according to) the Gittith. By (or for) the Sons of Korah. The Psalmist celebrates the blessedness of intimate communion with God, vs. 2—8 (1—7), and prays that he may himself enjoy it, vs. 9—13 (S—12.) The resemblance of this psalm, in subject, tone, and spirit, to Ps. xlii, is the more remarkable because each stands at the beginning of a series inscribed to the Sons of Korah. The experience here recorded is so evidently David's, that we must either understand the Sons of Korah to be mentioned merely as the musical performers, or suppose that they composed it to express the feelings of the king himself, a hypothesis which Hengstenberg illustrates by the case of David playing and singing before Saul, in order to alleviate his paroxysms of madness. For the arguments on both sides of the question, see above, on Ps. xlii. 1, and for the meaning of the Gittith, on Ps. viii. 1. lxxxi. 1.

2 (1.) How dear (to me are) thy dwellings, oh Jehovah, (God of) Hosts! The adjective is rendered by the English versions amiable, in the sense of the French aimable, lovely.    But the usage of the Hebrew word requires it to be understood as meaning dear, beloved, which is exactly the idea here required by the context. See above, on Ps. xlv. 1. The plural dwellings has reference to the subdivisions and appurtenances of the sanctuary, and is applied to the tabernacle in Ps. xliii. 3. Compare Ps. lxviii. 36 (35.) The divine titles are as usual significant. While one suggests the covenant relation between God and the petitioner, the other makes his sovereignty the ground of a prayer for his protection. The force of this impassioned exclamation is enhanced by the structure of the sentence, which consists of a single clause, like Ps. xviii. 2 (1.) With the whole verse compare Ps. xxvii. 1—5.

<!-- PAGE 259 -->
3 (2.) Longs and also faints my soul for the courts of Jehovah, my heart and my flesh; they sing (with joy) unto the living God. The first verb is expressive of intense desire, as in Ps. xvii. 12. Compare Gen. xxxi. 30. Instead of and also the English Bible has yea even, which is perhaps too strong, and indicates a climax not intended by the writer. Faints, fails, or is consumed with strong desire. The plural courts, i. e. enclosures, isloTe explained like dwellings in v. 2 (1.) Solomon's temple had two courts ; but one was appropriated to the priests, 2 Chr. iv. 9. The courts of the tabernacle are mentioned as the place where God statedly communed with Israel. See above, on Ps. lxv. 5 (4), and below, on Ps. xcii. 14 (13.) They are here mentioned-merely as a sign of the communion itself, which might be enjoyed in any place whatever. See above, on Ps. xxvii. 4. xxxvi. 9. Soul, heart, and flesh, denote the whole man. See above, on Ps. Ixiii. 2(1.) The Hebrew accents connect heart and flesh with the preceding words. A much more natural division is the common one, which construes them directly with the verb of the last clause. That verb elsewhere always denotes a joyful shout or song; but the derivative noun (ftp.) is used to signify a cry for help or earnest prayer, which meaning some attach to the vert itself in this place so as to make the clauses strictly parallel. If the usual meaning of the verb be here retained, the clause shows that the speaker had already experienced that for which he prays. The Living God, really existing, and the giver of life to others. See above, on Ps. xlii. 3 (2.)

<!-- PAGE 260 -->
4 (3.) Yes, the sparrow has found a home, and the swallow a nest, (in) which she lays her young, even thine altars, Jehovah, (God) of Hosts, my King and my God. The first word properly means also, as in the preceding verse, and is by some translated even, as if he had said, ' the very birds have nests in the sanctuary of God, while I am excluded from it.' Compare Matt. viii. 20. But the fact thus alleged is highly improbable and nowhere recorded. A more natural interpretation is to make the sparrow and the swallow (put for small and helpless birds in general) emblems of the worshipper himself. As if he had said, yes, this wandering bird has at last found a resting-place, or home, both for itself and for its young. That this is perfectly in keeping with Davidic usage, is plain from 1 Sam. xxvi. 20, Ps. xi. 1. lv. 7 (6.) lvi. 1. The translation even thine altars supposes the Hebrew particle (tia) to indicate the object of the verb, as it does before the same noun in 1 Kings xix. 10, 14. It may, however, be a preposition meaning at or near, and this sense is preferred by those interpreters who suppose a literal nestling of the birds in the sanctuary to be here alluded to. The altars meant are those of burnt-offering and of incense, as in Num. iii. 31. They are particularly mentioned, because it was by means of sacrifice and prayer that communion between God and man was possible. Compare Ps. xxvi. 6. The young birds are introduced, not only to complete the picture, but to show that the communion and divine protection, which the Psalmist so highly valued, were not merely "personal but domestic and social privileges, which ho desired both for himself and those dependent on him. The ad dress, Jehovah (God) of Hosts, has the same sense as in v. 2 (1.) 11* The same essential notions of supremacy and covenant relation are-conveyed by the parallel expression, my King and my God. a combination which occurs only here and in Ps. v. 3 (2.)

<!-- PAGE 261 -->
5 Happy the dwellers in thy house, (for) still they praise thee, (or will praise thee.) The first phrase is the idiomatic one with which the book begins, for the peculiar form and sense of which, see above, on Ps. i. 1. ii. 12. xxxii. 1, 2 xxxiii. 12. xli. 2 (1.) Dwellers in, inhabitants of, thy house, i. e. members of thy family, as the same words literally mean in Jer. xx. 5. For the spiritual or figurative meaning, see above, on Ps. xv. 1. xxiii. 6. xxiv. 3. xxvii. 4. lxi. 5 (4.) lxv. 5 (4.) The privilege thus described might be enjoyed in any local situation; but the outward sign of it, under the old economy, was the frequenting of the sanctuary. As inmates, not mere visitors, they will still have occasion and opportunity of doing what they do when first admitted to God's household. They will still praise, because they will have renewed cause so to do. See above, on Ps. v. 8 (7.) 1. 15, 23. lxxix. 13.

6 (5.) Happy the man who (has) strength in thee, (who have) highways in their heart. The original consists of several exclamations or ejaculations—happy man !—(there is) strength to him in thee ! — (there are) highways in their heart ! This last unusual and obscure expression is supposed by some to mean, in whose thoughts, (or affections) are the highways to Jerusalem, i. e. who still think of going up to worship there. But another explanation, which agrees far better, both with the immediate context and with usage and analogy, supposes the figure to be identical with that in Ps. 1. 23. Prov. xvi. 17. Isai. xl. 3, 4, where the removal of all moral or spiritual hinderances to God's revisiting his people and communing with them, is poetically represented as the opening, levelling, and raising of a causeway through a pathless wilderness or otherwise impracticable ground.    The word translated highways is determined, both by etymology and usage, to denote not a mere beaten track or footpath, but a road artificially constructed and raised above the level of the ground through which it passes. The sudden change of number in the last clause shows that man is a generic or collective term.

<!-- PAGE 262 -->
7 (6.) Passing through the, Vale of Tears, a spring they make it; also with blessings is the Teacher clothed. This is one of the obscurest verses in the book. Interpreters, however, are now commonly agreed as to the first clause. The explanation of Baca, as meaning the Valley of Mulberry or Baca-trees (2 Sam. v. 23, 24. 1 Chron. xiv. 13, 14), is now very commonly abandoned for the one given in the ancient versions, the Vale of Weeping or of Sorrow, a beautiful poetical description of the present life as one of suffering. To the fons lacrymarum is opposed the fountain of salvation or of joy, a figure so familiar in the Scriptures, as to be readily suggested by the one word spring or fountain. See above, on Ps. xxxvi. 10 (9.) xlvi. 5 (4), and compare Isai. xii. 3. The meaning of the clause, as thus explained, is, that the persons pronounced happy in the foregoing verse are a source of happiness, and convert the very Vale of Tears into a fountain of delight. The meaning of the other clause is still disputed. As the first noun, by varying a single vowel-point, may mean either pools or blessings, and the next, though it commonly means teacher (2 Kings xvii. 28. Prov. v. 13. Isai. xxx. 20), has in one other place (Joel ii. 23) the sense of rain, or rather of the early rain in Palestine, the clause admits of several very different explanations. 1. The ram also covers the pools. 2. The teacher is clothed in blessings. 3. The rain covers it with blessings. In favour of the second is its close adherence to the usage of the three leading words. It is also found substantially in the ancient versions. The meaning then is, that this strange transforming power is exerted by the good man as a teacher of right eousness, in which sense one of the disputed words (iTlifc) occurs in Joel ii. 23, which accounts for its being there repeated in the very same sentence, by a kind of paronomasia, in the sense of early rain, elsewhere denoted by a cognate form pTTi"). Compare the sentiment with that in Ps. Ii. 15 (13.) For the neuter or intransitive meaning of the last verb, see Lev. xiii. 45. Mic iii. 7. Jer. xliii. 12.

<!-- PAGE 263 -->
8 (7.) They shall go from strength to strength; /ie shall appear to God in Zion. The change of number is the opposite of that in v. 6 (5), but to be explained on the same principle. Or the singular verb in the last clause may refer to the Teacher in v. 7 (6.) The strength is that bestowed by God, in the experience of which they make continual advances. The form of expression in the last clause is one used in the Law to denote the stated appearance of the Israelites at the sanctuary. The meanin g of the whole verse is, that they who answer to the previous description shall finally attain to the full fruition of that union with God in which their happiness resides.

9 (8.) Jehovah, God, (Lord of) Hosts, hear my prayer ; give ear, oh God of Jacob ! Selah. Here begins the second part of the psalm, containing the petition founded on the preceding view of the happiness arising from communion with God. The names applied to him suggest, as usual, the grounds of the petition, namely, his eternity, self-existence, sovereignty, and covenantrelation to his people.

10 (9.) (Oh) our shield, sec, (oh) God, and behold the face oj thine Anointed. Some make the first noun the object of the verb that follows, see our shield ; but in v. 12 (11) God himself is so described, as well as in Ps. iii. 4 (3.) Gen. xv. 1. Its position as a vocative, is certainly unusual, but seems to be emphatic Behold the face, i. e. behold it favourably, look upon it graciousl;  ! Thine Anointed (Owe), i. e. David, by whom, or in whose name, the psalm was written.

<!-- PAGE 264 -->
11. (10.) For better (is) a day in thy courts than a thousand ; 1 have chosen to occupy the threshold in the house of my God, rather than dwell in tents of ivickedness. The comparison in both clauses is expressed, as usual in Hebrew, by the preposition from, away from. i Good from, i. e. in comparison with, a thousand.' ' I choose from dwelling, i. e. rather than to dwell.' The first clause of course means that one day in God's courts is better than a thousand elsewhere, i" have chosen, and do still choose, a stronger expression than I would choose or would rather. The next verb occurs only here and is evidently formed from the noun (t)0) sill or threshold. To be a door-keeper (guard the threshold), and to lie on the threshold, are tco specific, and appear to add something to the sense of the original. The idea perhaps is, that he would rather stand at the door of God's house and look in (which was all that the worshippers could do at the Mosaic sanctuary) than dwell in the interior of tents or houses where iniquity prevailed The use of the word tents in this clause makes it still more probable that the tabernacle, not the temple, is meant by the parallel expression, house of God.

12 (11.) For a sun and a shield is Jehovah, God; grace and glory will Jehovah give; he ivill not refuse (any thing) good to those walking in a perfect (way.) The for shows that this verse gives a reason for the preference expressed in that before it. God is here called a sun, as he is called a light in Ps. xxvii. 1. Both these figures represent him as a source of happiness ; that of a shield describes him as a source of safety, or a strong protector. Grace and glory (or honour) are related as the cause and the effect. The latter includes all the sensible fruits and manifestations of the divine favour. See above, on Ps. xlix. 17 (16 In a perfect is by some understood to mean as i perfect person, i. e. perfectly, uprightly.   See above on Ps. xv 2. xviii. 24 (23) and compare Gen. xvii. 1.

<!-- PAGE 265 -->
13 (12.) Jehovah, (Lord of) Hosts, happy the man trusting m thee. The participle is expressive of habitual reliance. Trusting in thee, as I do.
