<!-- psalm 86 | vol 2 | scan pages 270-275 -->

<!-- PAGE 270 -->
1. A JPrayer. By David. Incline, oh Jehovah, thine ear (and) answer me, for wretched and needy (am) I. The whole psalm is called a prayer, because entirely made up, either of direct petitions, or of arguments intended to enforce them. The tone and substance of the composition are well suited to David's situation in his days of suffering at the hands of Saul or Absalom more probably the latter, on account of the repeated allusions to deliverance from former trials of the same kind. Some account for the position of this psalm in the midst of a series inscribed to the Sons of Korah, by supposing that the latter composed it in the person or the spirit of David. See above, on Ps. lxxxiv. 1. The same hypothesis is used by these interpreters to explain the many forms of expression borrowed from other psalms of David ; as if the Sons of Korah meant to comfort him by the repetition of his own consolatory words in other cases. Compare 2 Cor. i. 4. The psalm admits of no minute or artificial subdivision. The only marked diversity of the parts is, that in vs. 1—10, petition is combined with argument, whereas in vs. 11—17, it is more unmixed. The first ground or reason is derived, in this verse, from the urgency of the necessity. At the same time, there is a tacit claim to God's protection, on the ground that he who asks it is one of his own people. According to the usage of the psalms, the afflicted and the needy denote sufferers among God's people. See above, on Ps. x. 2. ^

<!-- PAGE 271 -->
2. Keep my soul, for a gracious one (am) I; save thy servant^ even thou, my God, the (servant) trusting in thee. He prays for the safe-keeping of his soul or life, because it was this that the enemy threatened. See below, v. 14. The grounds assigned are two, or rather one exhibited in two forms. The first is, that he is a (*pcn) saint or gracious one, a merciful object of God's mercy. See above, on Ps. lxxxv. 8 (7.) The other is that, as a servant of Jehovah, he believes and trusts in him alone. The original expression is not in but to or toioards thee, as if implying that the believer turns or looks away from every other ground of confidence to God alone. The same construction occurs twice above, inPs. iv. 6 (5.) xxxi. 7 (6.)

3. Be gracious unto me, oh Lord, for unto thee will I cry all the day. The prayer is still substantially the same, but enforced by two additional reasons ; one implied in the divine name used, to wit, that God is his sovereign and as such bound to protect his subject; the other expressed, namely, that his subject never ceases to invoke his aid. The future meaning of the verb includes the present, but suggests the additional idea of determination to pursue the same course till the blessing is obtained. Compare Gen. xxxii. 27 (26.) Luke xviii. 1. All the day is a common idiomatic phrase equivalent to all the time in English, and may therefore be considered as including, though it does not formally express, the idea of every day or daily. See above, on Ps. xlii. 4,11 (3,10.)

4. Gladden the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, Lord, my soul do I raise. The first clause is not a mere periphrasis for " make me glad," or "cause me to rejoice." It means "make me heartily rejoice, because I am thy servant," thus suggesting a new ground of his petition, different in form although substantially identical with that in the preceding verse. A similar analogy exists between the  second clause of that verse a^d the second PSALM    LXXXVI 26i clause of this, the form of which, however, is borrowed from Fs. xxv. 1. Here, as there, to raise the soul to God is to regard him with affection and strong confidence. See above, on Ps. xxiv. 4. At the same time, there is an allusion to the strict sense of the Hebrew verb, as if he had said, l make my soul rejoice, since T bring it up or raise it to thee for*this very purpose.'    The force of the future is the same as in v. 4.

<!-- PAGE 272 -->
5 For thou, Lord, art good and forgiving and rich in mercy to all (those) invoking thee. God is not only the sovereign of his people, and as such bound by covenant to protect them, but benevolent or good in his own nature; and that not merely in the general, or in reference to all his creatures, but especially in reference to the undeserving and the ill-deserving ; that is, to such of them as really desire his favour, and evince their willingness to have it by the act of asking for it. Rich (in) mercy, literally, great (or much, abundant, plenteous, as to) mercy. This expression, and indeed the whole description, is borrowed from Ex. xxxiv. 6.

6. Give ear, Jehovah, to my 'prayer, and attend (or hearken) to the voice of my supplications. The same verbs are used in a similar connection, Ps. v. 2, 3 (1, 2.) The last word in Hebrew, according to its etymology, denotes specifically prayers for favour, grace, or mercy. See above, on Ps. xxviii. 6. xxxi. 23 (22.) There is no new ground or argument suggested here, beyond what is implied in the use of the word just explained, and of the divine name in the first clause.

7. In the day of my distress I will invoke thee, for thou wilt answer me. The future includes the present, I do and will invoke thee, call thee to my aid, or call upon thee for assistance. The second clause assigns the reason, namely, his conviction that he shall not call in vain.    The implied ground of this conviction is, that he never does and never did call, in the   exercise of faith, without being favourably heard or answered.

<!-- PAGE 273 -->
8. There is none like thee among the gods, oh Lord, and nothing like thy works (among their works.) This last, which might seem to be needed to complete the sense and the parallelism, was suppressed perhaps in order to suggest the idea, that the gods have no works, even the gentiles who worship them being creatures of Jehovah, as is expressly i tated in the next verse. Even the full comparison, however, in the first clause, does not necessarily concede the personal existence of the gods themselves, but only that of their material images, or at most the belief of their besotted worshippers. Compare with this verse its Mosaic models, Ex xv. 11. Deut. iii. 24, and the Davidic imitations of them, 2 Sam. vii. 22. Ps. xviii. 32 (31.) The exclusive godhead of Jehovah is here urged as a distinct ground or reason of importunate petition to him.

9. All nations which thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, oh Lord, and give honour to thy name. The common relation of Jehovah to all men as their Maker, although now denied by most nations, shall be one day universally acknowledged, not in word merely, but in act, the most expressive act of worship, involving a believing recognition of the previous display of God's perfections, in the language of the Scriptures called his name. This prospective view of the conversion of the world to the belief and service of its Maker shows 'how far the Old Testament writers were from cherishing or countenancing the contracted nationality of the later and the less enlightened Jews. See above, on Ps. xxii. 28, 29 (27, 28.) xlv. 13—17 (12—16.; xlvii. 10 (9), and compare Jer. xvi. 19. Zeph. ii. 11. Zech. xiv. 9, 16.

10. For great (art) thou and doing wonders, thou (art) God alone.    The only new idea here is the evidence afforded of  Je hovah's sole divinity by his miraculous performances. The for, at the beginning of the verse, implies that these proofs of divinity must sooner or later have their full effect.

<!-- PAGE 274 -->
11. Guide me, Jehovah, (in) thy way ; I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy name. The common version of the first verb (teach me) is too vague, as it fails to bring out the peculiar suitableness of the term to express the kind of teaching here specifically meant. The original meaning of the Hebrew word is to point out or mark the way. According to the usage of the Psalms, the way of God is here the course of his providential dealings, and his truth the truth of his promises, to walk in which is to assent to them or acquiesce in them and trust them. See above, on Ps. xxv. 4,5. xxvi. 3. That he may be enabled to do this without distraction or reserve, is the prayer of the last clause. The idea of a united heart is the opposite of a double heart.    See above, on Ps. xii. 3 (2), and compare James iv. 8.

12. I will thank thee, oh Lord my God, with all my heart, and 1 will honour thy name forever. The first verb means not merely to praise in general, but to praise for benefits received. See above, on Ps. vi. Q (o.) This verse describes the effect that is to follow from the granting of the prayer at the close of the preceding verse. When his heart is once united to fear God, cordial and perpetual thanksgiving will follow as a necessary consequence.

13. For thy mercy (has been) great towards me, and thou hast freed my soul from the lowest hell. The most natural explanation of these words is that which makes them an appeal to former mercies as a reason for expecting new ones. If the psalm belongs to the period of Absalom's rebellion (see above, on v. 1), the reference here may be to David's dangers and deliverances from Saul. Towards me, literally, on me, with an implication of descent from above.    Hell, in the wide sense of death or the stata 2G4 PSALM   LXXXV1. of the dead. See above, on Ps. vi. 6 (5.) Lowest, or lower, lying under, subterraneous. The expression is derived from Deut. xxxii. 22. With this verse compare Ps. xviii. 6 (5.) lvi. 14 (13.)

<!-- PAGE 275 -->
14. Oh God, 'proud {men) have arisen against me, and an assembly of violent (men) have sought my soul, and have not set thee before them. Nearly the same words had been used by David in reference to the Sauline persecution, Ps. liv. 5 (3). But instead of aliens, he here speaks of proud ones, and before the parallel term violent, oppressive, or tyrannical (Ps. xxxvii. 35), inserts congregation or assembly, as if to imply organization, both which variations agree well with the hypothesis that this psalm relates to the revolt of Absalom.

15. And thou, Lord, (art) a God merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth. He here appeals to God's description of himself as warranting his prayer for mercy See Ex. xxxiv. 6, and the imitations or quotations of it by Joel (ii. 13) and Jonah (iv. 2.)    See also Ps. lxxxv. 11 (10.)

16. Turn towards me and be gracious to me ; give thy strength to thy servant, and grant salvation to tlie son of thy handmaid. The first prayer implies that God's face had previously been averted. Give thy strength, exercise it for his protection. T/ie son of thy handmaid or female slave, i. e. a home-born and hereditary servant, and as such entitled to defence and sustenance The expression is borrowed from Ex. xxiii. 12, and re-appears in Ps. cxvi. 16. The last verb is the common one meaning to save, but here connected with its object by the proposition to.

17. Show me a token for good, and (then) my haters shall set and be shamed, because thou, Jehovah, hast helped me and comforted mc.    The  phrase translated show me strictly means do with me,
