<!-- psalm 87 | vol 2 | scan pages 276-280 -->

<!-- PAGE 276 -->
and is here used because the sign or token asked is neither a verbal declaration nor a miracle, but a practical or providential indication of God's favour, furnished by his dealings with him. The word translated good is the one used in Ps. xvi. 2, where as here it has the sense of physical good, welfare, happiness. A token for good is a pledge of its possession and enjoyment. The oblique construction, that my haters may see, is really included in the direct future. Shamed, surprised, disappointed, and confounded. The preterites in the last clause have reference to the time when this effect shall be produced upon the enemy, and when the divine help and consolation shall have been already granted. PSALM    L XX XVI I.

1. To (or by) the Sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song. Hts foundation (is) in the hills of holiness. The first title decides nothing as to the date of composition. See above, on Ps. xlii. 1. xlvi. 1. xlvii. 1. xlviii. 1. It is not only a psalm, a religious lyric, but a song, i. e. a song of praise or triumph. See above, on Ps. lxxxiii. 1. This agrees well with the tone of the composition, which seems to indicate some great deliverance as its historical occasion. The only one that can be fixed upon with any great degree of probability is that of Hezekiah from the power of Assyria. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 1. lxxv. 1. lxxvi. 1. In view of some such signal intervention in behalf of Israel, the psalm celebrates the actual security of Zion, vs. 1—3, and anticipates its future honours as the spiritual birth-place of the nations, vs. 4—7.    His foundation, that which he has founded, meaning his sanctuary and his theocratical kingdom. The plural expression, hills of holiness, means Zion in the wide sense, including all the heights on which Jerusalem was built. It was peculiarly appropriate in this case, if the psalm was v/ritten in the reign of Hezekiah, because at that time Zion, in the strict sense, was no longer the exclusive residence of God on earth. At the same time, there is particular reference to Zion m the citadel, in which the strength of the royal city was concentrated

<!-- PAGE 277 -->
2. Jehovah loves t/ie gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. This description of Jehovah's choice of Zion as his dwelling-place is similar to that in Ps. lxxviii. 68. The gates of a walled city give access to it and power over it, and are therefore naturally here put for the whole. The Hebrew participle (loving) implies constant and habitual attachment.

3. Glorious things (have been) spoken in thee, oh City of God ! Selah. Glorious or honourable things, in the way of prophecy and promise, the fulfilment of which is here implied. As if he had said, the promises respecting thee are great, but they are or shall be fully verified. So too in the other clause the meaning is, thou art well called the city of God, for he is in thee, to protect and honour thee. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 5 (4.) xlviii. 2, 9 (1, 8.) Instead of in thee some read of thee, but the former is entitled to the preference ; first, because it is the strict sense and therefore not to be rejected without reason; then, because it really includes the other, but is not included in it; lastly, because it suggests the additional idea of the holy city, as the scene, no less than the theme, of the prophetic visions.

4. I will mention Rehab and Babylon as knowing me. Lo, Philislia and Tyre with Ethiopia! This (one) was born there. Interpreters are commonly agreed, that these are the words of Qod. himself, though not expressly so announced.    The first vnrb in Hebrew is a causative, I will make to be remembered, celebrate, commemorate. See above, Ps. xx. 8 (7.) xlv. 18 (17.) lxxi. 16 (15.) Ixxvii. 12 (11.) It here means to announce or proclaim. To know God is to love him and to be his servant. See above, on Ps. xxxvi. 11 (10), and compare Isai. xix. 21. Those knowing him in this sense are his people. As knowing me, literally, to those knowing me, i. e. belonging to their number. Or the sense may be, for knowers of me, I will recognize and reckon them for such. Compare the Hebrew of Ex. xxi. 2, he shall go out free, literally, for free^ i. e. as free. The nations thus announced as belonging to God's people are mere samples of the whole gentile world, those being chosen for the purpose, who were or had been most connected with the history of Israel, and were at the same time ruling powers of antiquity. Rahab is an enigmatical name given to Egypt by the Prophet Isaiah. See below, on Ps. lxxxix. 11 (10), and compare my notes on Isai. xxx. 7. li. 9. Babylon is named instead of Assyria, perhaps because in Hezekiah's reign the former began to supersede the latter as the dominant power of Western Asia. See my note on Isai. xxxix. 1. Compare the prophecy respecting Egypt and Assyria in Isai. xix. 23, 24. Philistia and Tyre are put together, as in Ps. lxxxiii. 8 (7.) As to the latter, see above, on Ps. xlv. 13 (12), and compare Isai. xxiii. 18. The conversion of Cush or Ethiopia had already been foretold by David, Psr lxviii. 32 (31), and by Solomon, Ps. Ixxii. 10. The last words are obscure, but may be rendered clearer by supplying before them, as to each of these it shall be said. The pronoun (this) is then to be referred not to individual men, but to "the nations as ideal persons. The idea of regeneration or spiritual birth, applied in the New Testament to individuals, is here applied to nations, who are represented as born again, when received into communion with the church or chosen people.

<!-- PAGE 278 -->
5. And of Zion it shall be said, (This) man and (that) man was born in her, and He will establish her, the Highest.    The strict translation of the first words is to Zion, but the subsequent use of tho third person (in her) shows that the act described is that of speaking of a person in his presence, yet not directly to hiin, or, as we sometimes say in English, talking at him. See above, on Ps. iii. 3 (2.J Ixxi. 10. The idiomatic phrase man and man means every one or each one severally. See the Hebrew of Esther i. 8, and compare that of Lev. xvii. 10, 13. The clause may then be understood as asserting of individuals what had just been said of whole communities, or as repeating the latter, in a more emphatic form, for the purpose of connecting it with an additional promise, namely, that the church, thus enlarged by the accession of the Gentiles, shall be permanently established and secured. The pronoun is emphatic and is rendered more so by the epithet attached to it. He the Highest, or the Highest himself. The protector of the church is neither man nor angel, but the supreme and sovereign God.    See above, on Ps. xlvii. 3 (2.) xlviii. 9 (8.)

<!-- PAGE 279 -->
6 Jehovah shall count, in enrolling the nations : This (one) was born there. Selah. The theme or idea of the whole psalm, that Zion should yet be the birth place of all nations, is. again repeated, under a new figure, that of registration. Compare Ez. xiii. 9. The meaning is that, as he counts the nations, he shall say of each, in turn or one by one, this one was also born there. In enrolling, literally writing, i.e. inscribing in a list or register. The common version (when he writeth up the people) not only fails to reproduce the plural form of the last word, or to show in any way that more than a single nation is referred to, but ascribes the act of writing to the Lord himself, which, though not so inadmissible in a figurative passage as some writers think it, is not necessarily implied in the original, where the form of expression is in the writing, i. e. at the time or in the act of doing so, whether the act be that of God himself or merely done by his authority and undor his direction. PbALM   LXXXVI1. 269

<!-- PAGE 280 -->
7. And singers as well as flayers (shall be heard saying), All my springs are in thee. The construction in the first clause is peculiar, singers as players. See above, on Ps. xlviii. 6 (5.) The image present to the Psalmist's mind seems to be that of a procession or triumphal march, composed of the nations on their way to Zion. At the head of this procession are the minstrels, who, as the spokesmen of the rest, acknowledge that the source of their happiness is henceforth to bo sought in Zion, not as a mere locality, but as the place where God was pleased to manifest his gracious presence. It matters little, therefore, whether the closing words [in thee) be referred to God directly, or to Zion, as the channel through which he imparted spiritual blessings to the gentiles. Compare the figure of a spring -or stream in Joel iv. 18 (iii. 18.) Zech. xiii. 1. xiv. 8 Ez. xlvii. X, and see above, on Ps. Ixxxiv. 7 (6.) The word joined with singers admits of a twofold derivation, and may either mean player? upon instruments, or still more definitely, pipers, as the players on stringed instruments are named in the same connection, Ps. lxviii. 26 (25) ; or as some of the latest interpreters prefer, it may mean dancers, as this indication of joy was commonly practised, in ooDnection with singing, not only by women but by men. See above, on Ps. xxx. 12 (11), and below, on Ps cl. 4, and compare Ex. xv. 20. 2 Sam. vi. 16. The Selah at the end of the preceding ver3e shows that the variations of the main theme are concluded, and separate the body of the psalm from this verse, which contains tM words neither of the Psalmist nor the Church nor God himssM Hut of the convjrted Gentiles. 2?0 PSALM   LXXXVH
