<!-- psalm 95 | vol 2 | scan pages 336-340 -->

<!-- PAGE 336 -->
PSALM   XCV.

This psalm contains, first, an exhortation from the Psalmist to praise God as the creator and the sovereign of the earth, vs. 1—8, and then, a warning from God himself to his people not to imitate the obstinate unbelief of their fathers in the wilderness, vs. 9—V. The psalm is quoted in the New Testament (Heb. iv.,7) as wha^ God said in David, which may either mean the Book of Psalms, so called from its chief author, or this particular psalm, as actually written by him. The latter supposition, although not necessary, is entirely admissible, because, however suitable the psalm may seem to particular junctures long posterior to David, the very generality of its expressions makes it probable that it was not composed in the midst of the events, but long beforehand.

1. Come, let us sing unto Jehovah, let us shout unto the rock of our salvation. The first verb properly means go, but is constantly used like come in other languages, as a formula of invitation, in summoning others to participate in some act of the speaker. The two verbs in this verse are those commonly applied to the vocal expression of joy and triumph. The rock of our salvation, the strong ground of our confidence, the basis upon which our hope of safety rests. See above, on Ps. xviii. 3 (2), and compare Ps lxii. 8 (7.) xcii. 16 (15.) xciv. 22.

2. Let us come before his face with thanksgiving, and in songs let us shout unto him. The first verb is here used in its primary and proper sense.     See above, on Ps. xvii. 13.    That of surprising, or taking by surprise, upon which some interpreters insist, is neither intelligible in itself, nor suited to the context, nor justified by usage. To shout in songs is to sing aloud and with a voice of triumph.

<!-- PAGE 337 -->
3. For a great God (is) Jehovah, and a great King above all gods. This is not inconsistent with the doctrine elsewhere taught, that other gods have no real existence. See below, Ps. xcvi. 4, 5, where both truths are asserted together. The very name of God used in the first clause is expressive of omnipotence.

4. In whose hand are the depths of the earth and the strength of the hills (belongs) to him. God's possession of the whole earth is t>o asserted as to leave no room for other gods. The word translated depths means, according to its etymology, places to be searched into, i. e. requiring search to find them, inmost recesses. The word translated strength is plural in Hebrew, and seems properly to mean fatiguing exertions, from which some derive the idea of strength, others that of extreme height, which can only be reached by exhausting effort.

5. To whom (belongs) the sea, and he made it, and the dry land his hands did form. The land and water are here put together, as the depths and heights are in v. 4, to describe the earth in its whole extent as subject to Jehovah, by virtue of his right as its creator.

6. Come, let us bow down and bend, let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker. The come at the beginning of this verse is not a mere particle of exhortation, as in v. 1, but an invitation to God's presence. The Hebrew verb is one that strictly means to come, and sometimes to enter. See above, on Ps. lxxi. 16. This verse requires tho external indication of devout emotion, and not the mere internal feeling, although the latter is the most essential, as appears from what follows.

<!-- PAGE 338 -->
7. For Hi, (is) our God, and we (are) the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand, to-day, if to his voice ye will hearken. Tbe people of his pasture are those fed and nurtured by him. The sheep of his hand are those led and guarded by him. See above, on Ps. xxiii. 3, 4. Ixxiv. 1. lxxx. 13 (12.) We not only have been so, but are so now, to-day, provided we obey him. The last clause contains the condition of the first, precisely as in Ps. lxxxi. 9 (8.) In both cases this construction is more natural and satisfactory than either of the others among which interpreters have been divided; some making if an optative particle, c if ye would only hear !'—some supplying an apodosis, as in Ex. xxiii. 21,22, to which there seems to be an obvious allusion;—some continuing the sentence into the next verse, which is forbidden by the change of person there. This last construction is adopted in the Septuagint, as quoted in Heb. iii. 9 ; but this decides nothing as to the Hebrew syntax. To hear (or hearken to) God's voice is a common Hebrew phrase for obeying his commands.

8. Harden not your heart like Meribah, like the day of Massah in the wilderness. Be not wilfully and obstinately insensible. Your heart, in the singular number, because the people are addressed as an ideal person. Like Meribah, i. e. as your fathers did at Meribah. Like the day of Massah, as they did at that period of your national history associated with thtj name of Massah. The reference is to Ex. xvii. 7. The incident there recorded is here specified, for the sake of the significant names given to the place, Meribah (strife) and Massah (temptation.) Grod himself is here abruptly introduced as speaking. See above, on Ps. xlvi. 11 (10.) lxxv. 3, 4 (2, 3.) lxxxvii. 4. xci. 14.

9. When (or where) your fathers  tempted me; they proved ma (and) also saw my work. The first word in Hebrew is the relative pronoun, which for in ivhich, as in Ps. lxxxiv. 4 (3.) This may either mean in which place (where), or at which time (when), more probably the former, as the preceding verse is full of local nouns. Tempted me, see above, on Ps. lxxviii. 18, 41. Proved me, put me to the proof of my existence, presence, and power, by requiring me to work, i. e. to act in an extraordinary manner. And this desire, unreasonable as it was, I gratified. They not only demanded but they likewise (ta^ saw my work, i. e. what I could do. Some restrict these last words to the previous displays of God's almighty power, especially the plagues of Egypt. ' They proved me, or put me to the proof, although they had seen my work.' But neither the sense thus put upon the likewise, nor the pluperfect meaning of the verb, should be assumed without a greater necessity than here exists.

<!-- PAGE 339 -->
10. Forty years I am vexed with a (wicked) generation, and say, A people of wanderers in heart (are) they, and they do not know wy ways. The first verb strictly means to be sick of, or disgusted with, a thing or person. The future form expresses more distinctly the idea of protracted trial and annoyance. A generation, or contemporary race, as distinguished from mere individuals. This expression is the more appropriate because the threatening was fulfilled, with scarcely an exception, in the whole generation that came out of Egypt. The qualifying epithet supplied in the translation is derived from Deut. 1. 35 (compare Deut. ii. 14.) I say or said, i. e. I had occasion or good cause to say, T could have said with truth, or I was compelled to say. The next clause contains an allusion to their twofold wandering or error. They were not only wanderers in body but in heart, i. e. they erred from the path of duty, truth, and safety. This allusion seems to be continued in the last clause. They were not more bewildered in the mazes of the trackless waste, than ignorant of God's ways, i. e  of the meaning and design of his providential dealings with them.    Compare Deut. xxix. 3.

<!-- PAGE 340 -->
11. Unto whom I sware in my wrath. If they shall come into my rest (or resting-place.) Here again the first word is a relative pronoun, and may either be a dative, as in the common version of the first clause above given ; or an adverb of time or place (when or where) as in v. 9 above ; or a conjunction (so that) as the latest interpreters prefer. The conditional clause, with which the sentence closes, is the strongest form of negation, being that employed in the most solemn oaths. See above, on Ps. lxxxix. 36 (35.) It is here equivalent to saying, they shall not come, etc. The form of speech is that actually used in the original threatening, as recorded by Moses, Num. xiv. 23, 30. Deut i. 35. The word for rest is not an abstract but a local term as indicated by its form. It is here applied to the Promised Land, as in Deut. xii. 9. There is something unusual and abrupt in the conclusion of this psalm, without any cheering prospect to relieve the threatening. This may be best explained by assuming, that it was not meant to stand alone, but to form one of a series
