<!-- psalm 96 | vol 2 | scan pages 340-345 -->

<!-- PAGE 340 -->
A joyous celebration of the universal spread of the true religion and conversion of the Gentiles. The structure of the psalm is perfectly simple, and all attempts at artificial subdivision and arrangement are either wholly arbitrary or founded upon dubious hypotheses.    The  marked resemblance of the diction to that of Isaia!? in his later prophecies, has been thought to fix the date of tho composition as posterior to that Prophet. This seems indeed to be forbidden by the fact that in 1 Chr. xvi, as commonly interpreted, this psalm, with portions of others, is said to have been sung at the dedication of the tabernacle on Mount Zion in the time of David. But according to Hengstenberg, the true sense of that passage is, that David instituted the musical service of the sanctuary, of which samples are then given, taken not from the most ancient psalms, but from those most familiar to the people when the history was written. See below, the prefatory note to Ps. cv and cvi. The psalm before us seems to form a pair or double psalm with that preceding, the Jews and Gentiles being then successively addressed, as in Isai. ii. 3—5, but in an inverted order.

<!-- PAGE 341 -->
1. Sing unto Jehovah a new song ; sing unto Jehovah all the earth. A new song implies fresh occasion to praise God, net for the mere repetition of his former favours, but for some new dispensation of his grace. See above, on Ps. xxxiii. 3. xl. 3 (2.) The one here meant is the extension of his favour to the nations, who are therefore summoned in the last clause to celebrate his praise themselves.    Compare Isai. xlii. 10. Rev. v. 9, 10.

2. Sing unto Jehovah, bless his name, 'proclaim from day to day his salvation. To bless his name is to praise him for the manifestation of his attributes. The verb translated proclaim is constantly applied to joyful tidings. See above, on Ps. xl. 10 (9.) lxviii. 12 (11), and compare Isai. lx. 9. Hi. 7. lx. 6. The phrase from day to day implies that the occasion of the praise required is not a transient one but permanent and perpetual. His salvation, that which he has wrought, provided, and revealed, not for the Jews only but for the Gentiles also. With this and the preceding verse compare 1 Chr. xvi. 23.

3. Recount among the nations his glory, among all the peoples his wondei s. The i Be of glory, to denote the special manifestation of God's attributes, is a characteristic feature of Isaiah's later prophecies. To preclude all doubt as to the extent of the invitation, the ambiguous expression all the earth, in v. 1, is here explained to mean the nations, and then still more absolutely all the peoples. The only variation of the parallel passage (1 Chr. xvi. 24) is the insertion of the objective particle (r,a) in the first clause.

<!-- PAGE 342 -->
4. For great (is) Jehovah and to be praised exceedingly ; to be feared (is) He above all Gods. He is not a mere local deity, as the heathen were disposed to imagine, even in reference to their own divinities. With this verse compare Ps. xlvii. 3 (2.) xlviii 2(1.) lxxvii. 14 (13.) lxxxvi. 8. xcv. 3. xcvii. 8. xcix. 2.

5. For all the gods of the nations are nothings, and Jehovah the heavens did make. Nothings, nonentities, a favourite description of idols in Isaiah's later prophecies. See e. g. Isai. xli. 24, and compare Lev. xix. 4.'xxvi. 1, 1 Cor. ,viii. 4—6. x. 19. A less probable etymology of the Hebrew word makes it a diminutive of (ba) El, analogous to godlings as an expression of contempt. The contrast intended is extreme and absolute. He called the world into existence ; they do not even exist themselves. See above, Ps. xcv. 4.

6. Honour and majesty 'are) before him, strength and beauty in his holy-place. The first, combination occurs above, Ps. xlv. 4 (3.) Before him, as his constant attendants or forerunners. Beauty, all that is lovely and admirable. See above, on Ps. Ixxi. 8. His holy place, his earthly residence, regarded as a radiating centre even to the G-entiles ; or the place where God reveals himself, whatever it may be.

7. Give to Jehovah, ye families of nations, give to Jehovah glory and strength.    Compare Ps. xxix. 1.    Here, as there, to give is to ascribe or recognize as belonging to him. The expression families of Tuitions is Mosaic. See Gen. xii. 3. The parallel passage (1 Chr xvi. 27) has, strength and joy (are) in his place.

<!-- PAGE 343 -->
8. Give unto Jehovah the glory of his name ; take an offering and come to his courts. With the first clause compare Ps. xxix 2. The verb translated take includes the ideas of taking up and carrying. See above, on Ps. lxviii. 30 (29.) lxxii. 10. lxxvi. 12, and compare 2 Sam. viii. 2. The word offering is the one used to denote the bloodless or vegetable oblation of the Mosaic ritual. His courts, see above, on Ps. lxv. 5 (4.) lxxxiv. 3 (2.) xcii. 14 (13.) The parallel passage (1 Chr. xvi. 29) has before him.

9. Bow down to Jehovah in beauty of holiness; tremble before him, all the earth ! The first verb denotes the act of bowing to the ground, as practised in the East. For the meaning of the next phrase, beauty of holiness, see above, on Ps. xxix. 2, from which place it is borrowed here. The last clause enjoins the reverential awe due to the exhibition of the divine majesty. Compare Ps. ii. 11. The plural form of the verb {tremble ye) shows that the earth is put for its inhabitants. Before him, literally, from his face. The parallel passage (1 Chr. xvi. 30) has a double preposition, a Hebrew idiom which cannot be reproduced in English, and which does not in the least affect the sense. We also find there added to the verse before us the middle clause or member of the next verse.

10. Say ye among the nations, Jehovah reigns; likewise fixed is the world, it shall not be moved ; He will judge the peoples in rectitude. The object of address can only be the nations themselves, as in the foregoing context. They are therefore summoned to announce the joyful news to one another. Jehovah reigns, has begun to feign, i. e. visibly See above, on Ps. xciii. 1, and compare Isoi. xxiv. 23. Hi. 7.    As in Ps. xciii. 1, the  conservation of the world is ascribed to God's power, so here to his justice. Compare Ps. Ixxv. 4 (3.) lie will judge the nations : see above, on Ps. vii. 9 (8.) lxxii. 2, 4, and compare Isai. xi. 4. In equities, see above, on Ps. Ixxv. 3 (2.) It may here mean impartiality, without distinction between Jew and Gentile. This last clause is omitted in the parallel passage (1 Chr xvi. 31) which also has instead of say ye, they shall say, and joins it to what is here the next verse.

<!-- PAGE 344 -->
11. Let the heavens rejoice and the earth exult; let the sea roar and its fulness. The optative form of the second verb determines the meaning of the other futures, which, however, really include a prediction or, what here amounts to the same thing, a confident anticipation. Its fulness, that which fills it, its contents. This verse does not necessarily imply a participation of inferior creatures in God's favour to his people (Rom. .viii. 21), but may be understood as a strong poetical description of events so joyous that even the inanimate creation breaks forth into singing. Compare Isai. xliv. 23. lv. 12. The verb translated roar is a cognate form of that which means to thunder, Ps. xxix. 3.

12. Let the field exult and all that (is) in it; then shall sing for joy all the trees of the wood (or forest.) The strict sense of the future, which was latent in the preceding verse, here, by a beautiful transition, reasserts itself. See below, on Ps. exxvi. 2, and compare Isai. xxxv. 5, 6. The field is the cultivated and productive portion of the earth. All that is in it, with particular reference to its productions. Sing for joy is the translation of a single verb in Hebrew. See above, on Ps. xcv. 1. The paral* lei passage (1 Chr. xvi. 32, 33) has precisely the same sense, but with two slight variations in the words, a less familiar form being substituted in one case, and a more familiar form in the other

<!-- PAGE 345 -->
13. Before Jehovah, for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth; he shall judge the world in righteousness, and nations in his truth (or faithfulness.) The rejoicing described in the preceding verse is to take place in the presence (literally, to the /ace) of God when he assumes his universal sovereignty, the judicial function of which is here made prominent, in order to suggest the moral perfection of his reign. In righteousness, not merely in a righteous manner, but in the exercise of his inherent; and essential justice. The use of the word 'people, in the common version of the last clause, obscures the sense, by seeming to apply the verse to Israel, whereas it is expressly applied in the original to the nations generally. Even the truth or faithfulness of God, which commonly denotes his veracity in fulfilling his promises to the chosen people, has here a wider sense, as opposed to the dishonesty or partiality of human judges. In the parallel passage (1 Chron. xvi. 33) the emphatic repetition in the first clause, and the whole of the last clause, are omitted, perhaps because so striking and sonorous a conclusion would not have been appropriate, when another psalm was to be added.
