<!-- psalm 97 | vol 2 | scan pages 345-349 -->

<!-- PAGE 345 -->
Another exhibition of Jehovah's universal sovereignty, in which his judicial functions are again made prominent, but with special reference to the condemnation and destruction of the unbelieving nations. The structure of the psalm is remarkably like that of the second, consisting of four stanzas of three verses each. The first describes the Lord's appearing as the Judge of the Nations, vs. 1—3. The second, its effects upon inanimate creation, vs. 4—6.   The third, its effects upon idolaters and Israel respectively PSALM   XCVII. vs. 7—9. The fourth applies it as a present warning and encouragement to true believers, vs. 10—12. The characteristic feature of the psalm is its frequent citation of older scriptures, all anterior to the Babylonish exile, from which Hengstenberg infers, not only the date of this composition, but the fact that all the sacred writings of the ancient Hebrews are now extant in the Bible.

<!-- PAGE 346 -->
1. Jehovah reigneth, let the earth exult; glad be the many islands ! For the meaning of the first clause, see above, on Ps. xciii. 1. xcvi. 10; for that of the second, on Ps. xcvi. 11. The manifestation of the divine royalty is often represented as a cause for universal joy, even when attended by direct advantage only to the chosen people, and by fearful judgments to mankind at large*. See above, on Ps. xviii. 50 (49.) xlvii. 2 (1), and compare Deut. xxxii. 43. The last clause bears a strong resemblance to Isai. xlii. 10, 12, the use of the word isles in both, to-designate the Gentiles, being founded upon Gen. x. 5. See also Ps. lxxii. 10.     The many islands, see above, on Ps. lxxxix. 51 (50.)

2. Vapour and gloom (are) round him; righteousness and judgment {are) the place of his throne. The images and terms in the first clause are borrowed from Deut. v. 22. Compare Ex. xix. 16, 18, and see above, on Ps. xviii. 10, 12 (9, 11.) With the last clause compare Ps. lxxxix. 15 (14.) Righteousness and judgment seem to be here related as the attribute and act. The word translated place has, from its very derivation, the specific sense of a permanent or fixed place, and especially a dwellingplace. Compare 1 Kings viii. 13. The figures in the first clause are expressive of concealment or mystery, but only as a source of solemn awe, as in the great theophany on Sinai.

3. Fire before him goes, and burns up around (him) his fees With  the  first clause  compare Ps. 1. 3 ;  with  the last,  Tsai xlii. 25. See also Ps. lxxxiii. 15 (14.) The future form is used because the verb describes not what the wrath of God is doing or has actually done, but what it will do when provoked by obstinate resistance.

<!-- PAGE 347 -->
4. His lightnings made the world shine ; (then) saiv and trembled the earth. Compare Ps. lxxvii. 17, 19 (16, 18.) Here begins the second stanza, in which, as in most cases of the same sort, inanimate creation is described as sharing in the powerful effects of the divine epiphany. See above, on Ps. xviii. 8 (7.) xcvi. 11, 12, and compare Judg. v. 4. Nah. i. 5. Hab. iii. 6. Isai. Ixiv. 1.

5. Mountains like wax are melted from before Jehovah, from be.fore the Lord of all the earth. Compare Mic. i. 4. iv. 13. As in all such cases, while mountains are mentioned as the salient points of the earth, they suggest, at the same time, the idea of great states and kingdoms, of which they are a standing symbol. See above, on Ps. xxx. 8 (7.) xlvi. 3 (2.)

6. The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the nations see his glory. With the first clause compare Ps. 1. 6, and with the last Isai. xl. 5. lxvi. 18. See also Isai. xxxv. 2. lix. 19. The manifestation of Jehovah's glory to the Gentiles is a favourite conception of Isaiah, and particularly frequent in his later prophecies.

7. Shamed shall be all serving a graven image and boasting themselves of idols. Bow down to him, all ye gods ! The first word means not merely ashamed, but disappointed, defeated, and confounded. All serving or all servers (i. e. worshippers) of a graven image. Boasting themselves, exulting in the knowledge and possession and imagined favour of material images. Idols, nothings or nonentities, as in Ps. xcvi. 5.    The use of this word shows that in the following clause the false gods are invested with existence only to be treated with the more contempt. Compare Ex. xii. 12. Num. xxxiii. 4. Isai. xix. 1. xlii. 17. xliv. 9. The verb in this clause might be taken as a preterite, worship or have worshipped ; but the imperative construction seems to be required by the analogy of Ps. xcvi. 9. These words are not applied to Christ directly in Heb. i. 6. It is merely said that when God sends his son into the world, he may be understood as saying again (naXtv) of him, what is here said of himself, to wit, that even the false gods are required to worship him, much more the angels who have real existence. The passage was no doubt suggested to the mind of the New Testament writer by the fact that the Septuagint renders gods by angels, though he does not copy this erroneous version.

<!-- PAGE 348 -->
8. Zion hears and rejoices, and glad are the daughters of JudaJu, because of thy judgments, Jehovah ! "While the heathen are confounded, the people of God rejoice. The terms of the verse are borrowed from Ps. xlviii. 12 (11), in the note upon which the ambiguous phrase, daughters of Judah, is explained. The judgments here particularly meant are those inflicted on the unbelieving Gentiles.

9. For thou, Jehovah, {art) Most High above all the earth; greatly art thou exalted above all gods. Jehovah's infinite superiority to idols and their worshippers is once more solemnly asperted Wi& the first clause compare Ps. lxxxiii. 19 (18) ; with the second Ps. xlvii. 10 (9.) It is remarkable that two psalms are here put together in quotation, which there is strong internal reason for supposing to have been occasioned by a victory of Jehoshaphat.

10. Lovers of Jehovah, hate evil! He keeps the souls of his gracious ones; from the hand of wicked {men) h«. will set  them 15 free. The people of God are now exhorted not to do evil in the hope of thereby being safer. Evil, in the moral sense of wicked ness, and more especially injustice. See above, on Ps. vii. 10 (9.) xxxiv. 14, 15. With the first words of the verse compare Ps. v 12 (11.) He keeps, or rather, he (is) keeping, i. e. habitually constantly preserving. The danger, against which they particularly need protection, is distinctly mentioned in the last clause, namely, that arising from the enmity of wicked men. Gracious ones, objects of God's mercy, subjects of his grace, a favourite description of the righteous or true believers, as a class. See above, on Ps. iv. 4 (3.)

<!-- PAGE 349 -->
11. Light (is) sown for the just (man), and for right-hearted (men) joy. The figurative term light is explained by the literal one joy or gladness. Its being sown suggests the two ideas of diffusion and productiveness. Compare the similar and parallel expression, Ps. cxii. 4. The alternation of the singular and plural number shows that the just man of the first clause is an ideal person, representing a whole class.

12. Rejoice, ye righteous, in Jehovah, and give thanks to the memory of his holiness. Since joy is the portion of the righteous, let them accept it and make use of it, but only in the Lord, i. e. in reference to the possession and enjoyment of his favour, as the reason and the warrant for rejoicing. At the same time let them testify their gratitude to that divine perfection which is treasured in their memory and suggested by the name of God. See above, on Ps. xxx. 5 (4.) xxxii. 11, from which the language of thia Terse is borrowed.
