CHAPTER 1
<500101>PHILIPPIANS 1:1-6
1. Paul and Timotheus, the servants
of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi,
with the bishops and deacons:
1. Paulus et Timotheus, servi Iesu
Christi, omnibus sanctis in
Christo Iesu, qui sunt Philippis,
cum Episcopis et Diaconis
2. Grace be unto you, and peace,
from God our Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ
2. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo.
3. I thank my God upon every
remembrance of you,
3. Gratias ago Deo meo in omni
memoria vestri. f23
4. Always in every prayer of mine
for you all, making request with joy,
4. Semper in omni precatione mea
pro vobis omnibus cum gaudio
precationem faciens,
5. For your fellowship in the gospel
from the first day until now;
5. Super communicatione vestra
in Evangelium, a primo die
hucusque;
6. Being confident of this very thing,
that he which hath begun a good
work in you, will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ.
6. Hoc ipsum persuasus, quod
qui cœpit in vobis opus bonum,
perficiet usque in diem Iesu
Christi.
1. Paul and Timotheus, servants of Jesus Christ. While Paul is accustomed,
in the inscription of his epistles, to employ titles of distinction, with the
view of procuring credit for himself and his ministry, there was no need of
lengthened commendations in writing to the Philippians, who had known
him by experience as a true Apostle of Christ, and still acknowledged him

as such beyond all controversy. For they had persevered in the calling of
God steadfastly, and in an even tenor. f24
Bishops. He names the pastors separately, for the sake of honor. We may,
however, infer from this, that the name of bishop is common to all the
ministers of the Word, inasmuch as he assigns several bishops to one
Church. The titles, therefore, of bishop and pastor, are synonymous. And
this is one of the passages which Jerome quotes for proving this in his
epistle to Evagrius, f25 and in his exposition of the Epistle to Titus. f26
Afterwards f27 there crept in the custom of applying the name of bishop
exclusively to the person whom the presbyters in each church appointed
over their company. f28 It originated, however, in a human custom, and
rests on no Scripture authority. I acknowledge, indeed, that, as the minds
and manners of men are, there cannot be order maintained among the
ministers of the word, without one presiding over the others. I speak of
particular bodies, f29 not of whole provinces, much less of the whole world.
Now, although we must not contend for words, it were at the same time
better for us in speaking to follow the Holy Spirit, the author of tongues,
than to change for the worse forms of speech which are dictated to us by
Him. For from the corrupted signification of the word this evil has
resulted, that, as if all the presbyters f30 were not colleagues, called to the
same office, one of them, under the pretext of a new appellation, usurped
dominion over the others.
Deacons. This term may be taken in two ways — either as meaning
administrators, and curators of the poor, or for elders, who were appointed
for the regulation of morals. As, however, it is more generally made use of
by Paul in the former sense, I understand it rather as meaning stewards,
who superintended the distributing and receiving of alms. On the other
points consult the preceding commentaries.
3. I give thanks. He begins with thanksgiving f31 on two accounts — first,
that he may by this token shew his love to the Philippians; and secondly,
that, by commending them as to the past, he may exhort them, also, to
perseverance in time to come. He adduces, also, another evidence of his
love — the anxiety which he exercised in supplications. It is to be
observed, however, that, whenever he makes mention of things that are
joyful, he immediately breaks forth into thanksgiving — a practice with
which we ought also to be familiar. We must, also, take notice, what things

they are for which he gives thanks to God, — the fellowship of the
Philippians in the gospel of Christ; for it follows from this, that it ought to
be ascribed to the grace of God. When he says, upon every remembrance
of you, he means, “As often as I remember you.”
4. Always in every prayer. Connect the words in this manner: “Always
presenting prayer for you all in every prayer of mine.”For as he had said
before, that the remembrance of them was an occasion of joy to him, so he
now subjoins, that they come into his mind as often as he prays. He
afterwards adds, that it is with joy that he presents prayer in their behalf.
Joy refers to the past; prayer to the future. For he rejoiced in their
auspicious beginnings, and was desirous of their perfection. Thus it
becomes us always to rejoice in the blessings received from God in such a
manner, as to remember to ask from him those things that we are still in
need of.
5. For your fellowship. He now, passing over the other clause, states the
ground of his joy — that they had come into the fellowship of the gospel,
that is, had become partakers of the gospel, which, as is well known, is
accomplished by means of faith; for the gospel appears as nothing to us, in
respect of any enjoyment of it, until we have received it by faith. At the
same time the term fellowship may be viewed as referring to the common
society of the saints, as though he had said that they had been associated
with all the children of God in the faith of the gospel. When he says, from
the first day, he commends their promptitude in having shewn themselves
teachable immediately upon the doctrine being set before them. The phrase
until now denotes their perseverance. Now we know how rare an excellence
it is, to follow God immediately upon his calling us, and also to persevere
steadfastly unto the end. For many are slow and backward to obey, while
there are still more that fall short through fickleness and inconstancy. f32
6. Persuaded of this very thing. An additional ground of joy is furnished in
his confidence in them for the time to come. f33 But some one will say,
why should men dare to assure themselves for to-morrow amidst so great
an infirmity of nature, amidst so many impediments, ruggednesses, and
precipices? f34 Paul, assuredly, did not derive this confidence from the
steadfastness or excellence of men, but simply from the fact, that God had
manifested his love to the Philippians. And undoubtedly this is the true
manner of acknowledging God’s benefits — when we derive from them

occasion of hoping well as to the future. f35 For as they are tokens at once
of his goodness, and of his fatherly benevolence towards us, what
ingratitude were it to derive from this no confirmation of hope and good
courage! In addition to this, God is not like men, so as to be wearied out or
exhausted by conferring kindness. f36 Let, therefore, believers exercise
themselves in constant meditation upon the favors which God confers,
that they may encourage and confirm hope as to the time to come, and
always ponder in their mind this syllogism: God does not forsake the work
which his own hands have begun, as the Prophet bears witness,
(<19D808>Psalm 138:8; <236408>Isaiah 64:8;) we are the work of his hands;
therefore he will complete what he has begun in us. When I say that we are
the work of his hands, I do not refer to mere creation, but to the calling by
which we are adopted into the number of his sons. For it is a token to us
of our election, that the Lord has called us effectually to himself by his
Spirit.
It is asked, however, whether any one can be certain as to the salvation of
others, for Paul here is not speaking of himself but of the Philippians. I
answer, that the assurance which an individual has respecting his own
salvation, is very different from what he has as to that of another. For the
Spirit of God is a witness to me of my calling, as he is to each of the elect.
As to others, we have no testimony, except from the outward efficacy of
the Spirit; that is, in so far as the grace of God shews itself in them, so that
we come to know it. There is, therefore, a great difference, because the
assurance of faith remains inwardly shut up, and does not extend itself to
others. But wherever we see any such tokens of Divine election as can be
perceived by us, we ought immediately to be stirred up to entertain good
hope, both in order that we may not be envious f37 towards our neighbors,
and withhold from them an equitable and kind judgment of charity; and
also, that we may be grateful to God. f38 This, however, is a general rule
both as to ourselves and as to others — that, distrusting our own strength,
we depend entirely upon God alone.
Until the day of Jesus Christ. The chief thing, indeed, to be understood here
is — until the termination of the conflict. Now the conflict is terminated
by death. As, however, the Spirit is accustomed to speak in this manner in
reference to the last coming of Christ, it were better to extend the
advancement of the grace of Christ to the resurrection of the flesh. For
although those who have been freed from the mortal body do no longer

contend with the lusts of the flesh, and are, as the expression is, beyond
the reach of a single dart, f39 yet there will be no absurdity in speaking of
them as in the way of advancement, f40 inasmuch as they have not yet
reached the point at which they aspire, — they do not yet enjoy the
felicity and glory which they have hoped for; and in fine, the day has not
yet shone which is to discover the treasures which lie hid in hope. And in
truth, when hope is treated of, our eyes must always be directed forward
to a blessed resurrection, as the grand object in view.
<500107>PHILIPPIANS 1:7-11
7. Even as it is meet for me to think
this of you all, because I have you in
my heart; inasmuch as both in my
bonds, and in the defense and
confirmation of the gospel, ye all are
partakers of my grace.
7. Sicuti iustum est mihi hoc de
vobis omnibus sentire, propterea
quod in corde vos habeam, esse
omnes participes gratiæ meæ, et in
vinculis meis, et in defensione, et
confirmatione Evangelii.
8. For God is my record, how greatly
I long after you all in the bowels of
Jesus Christ.
8. Testis enim mihi est Deus, ut
desiderem vos omnes in visceribus
f41 Iesu Christi.
9. And this I pray, that your love
may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and in all judgment;
9. Et hoc precor, ut caritas vestra
adhue magis ac magis abundet cum
agnitione, omnique intelligentia:
10. That ye may approve things that
are excellent; that ye may be sincere,
and without offense, till the day of
Christ:
10. Ut probetis quæ utilia sunt,
qno sitis sinceri, et inoffensi usque
in diem Christi.
11. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of
God.
11. Impleti fructibus iustitiae, qui
sunt per Iesum Christum, in
gloriam et laudem Dei.
7. As it is reasonable. For we are envious f42 valuators of the gifts of God if
we do not reckon as children of God those in whom there shine forth those
true tokens of piety, which are the marks by which the Spirit of adoption
manifests himself. Paul accordingly says, that equity itself dictates to him,
f43 that he should hope well of the Philippians in all time to come,

inasmuch as he sees them to be associated with himself in participation of
grace. It is not without due consideration that I have given a different
rendering of this passage from that of Erasmus, as the judicious reader will
easily perceive. For he states what opinion he has of the Philippians,
which was the ground of his hoping well respecting them. He says, then,
that they are partakers with him of the same grace in his bonds, and in the
defense of the gospel.
To have them in his heart is to reckon them as such in the inmost affection
of his heart. For the Philippians had always assisted Paul according to
their ability, so as to connect themselves with him as associates for
maintaining the cause of the gospel, so far as was in their power. Thus,
although they were absent in body, yet, on account of the pious
disposition which they shewed by every service in their power, he
recognises them as in bonds along with him. “I have you, therefore, in my
heart;”this is, sincerely and without any pretense, assuredly, and with no
slight or doubtful opinion — as what? as partakers of grace — in what? in
my bonds, by which the gospel is defended. As he acknowledged them to
be such, it was reasonable that he should hope well respecting them.
Of my grace and in the bonds. It were a ludicrous thing in the view of the
world to reckon a prison to be a benefit from God, but if we estimate the
matter aright, it is no common honor that God confers upon us, when we
suffer persecution for the sake of his truth. For it was not in vain that it
was said,
Blessed shall ye be, when men shall afflict and harass you with all
kinds of reproaches for my name’s sake. (<400511>Matthew 5:11)
Let us therefore bear in remembrance also, that we must with readiness and
alacrity embrace the fellowship of the cross of Christ as a special favor
from God. In addition to bonds he subjoins the defense and confirmation of
the gospel, that he may express so much the better the honourableness of
the service which God has enjoined upon us in placing us in opposition to
his enemies, so as to bear testimony to his gospel. For it is as though he
had entrusted us with the defense of his gospel. And truly it was when
armed with this consideration, that the martyrs were prepared to contemn
all the rage of the wicked, and to rise superior to every kind of torture.
And would that this were present to the mind of all that are called to make
a confession of their faith, that they have been chosen by Christ to be as

advocates to plead his cause! For were they sustained by such consolation
they would be more courageous than to be so easily turned aside into a
perfidious revolt. f44
Here, however, some one will inquire, whether the confirmation of the
gospel depends on the steadfastness of men. I answer, that the truth of
God is in itself too firm to require that it should have support from any
other quarter; for though we should all of us be found liars, God,
nevertheless, remains true. (<450304>Romans 3:4.) There is, however, no
absurdity in saying, that weak consciences are confirmed in it by such
helps. That kind of confirmation, therefore, of which Paul makes mention,
has a relation to men, as we learn from our own experience that the
slaughter of so many martyrs has been attended at least with this
advantage, that they have been as it were so many seals, by which the
gospel has been sealed in our hearts. Hence that saying of Tertullian, that
“the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church,”— which I have
imitated in a certain poem: “But that sacred blood, f45 the maintainer of
God’s honor, will be like seed for producing offspring.” f46
8. For God is my witness. He now declares more explicitly his affection for
them, and, with the view of giving proof of it, he makes use of an oath, and
that on good grounds, because we know how dear in the sight of God is the
edification of his Church. It was, too, more especially of advantage, that
Paul’s affection should be thoroughly made known to the Philippians. For
it tends in no small degree to secure credit for the doctrine, when the
people are persuaded that they are beloved by the teacher. He calls God as
a witness to the truth, inasmuch as he alone is the Truth, and as a witness
of his affection, inasmuch as he alone is the searcher of hearts. In the word
rendered long after, a particular term is made use of instead of a general,
and it is a token of affection, inasmuch as we long after those things which
are dear to us.
In the bowels. He places the bowels of Christ in opposition to carnal
affection, to intimate that his affection is holy and pious. For the man that
loves according to the flesh has respect to his own advantage, and may
from time to time change his mind according to the variety of
circumstances and seasons. In the meantime he instructs us by what rule
the affections of believers ought to be regulated, so that, renouncing their
own will, they may allow Christ to sit at the helm. And, unquestionably,

true love can flow from no other source than from the bowels of Christ,
and this, like a goad, ought to affect us not a little — that Christ in a
manner opens his bowels, that by them he may cherish mutual affection
between us. ft47
9. This I pray that your love. He returns to the prayer, which he had
simply touched upon in one word in passing. He states, accordingly, the
sum of those things which he asked from God in their behalf, that they
also may learn to pray after his example, and may aspire at proficiency in
those gifts. The view taken by some, as though the love of the Philippians
denoted the Philippians themselves, as illiterate persons are accustomed
very commonly to say, “Your reverence,”— “Your paternity,”is absurd.
For no instance of such an expression occurs in the writings of Paul, nor
had such fooleries come into use. Besides, the statement would be less
complete, and, independently of this, the simple and natural meaning of
the words suits admirably well. For the true attainments of Christians are
when they make progress in knowledge, and understanding, and
afterwards in love. Accordingly the particle in, according to the idiom of
the Hebrew tongue, is taken here to mean with, as I have also rendered it,
unless perhaps one should prefer to explain it as meaning by, so as to
denote the instrument or formal cause. For, the greater proficiency we
make in knowledge, so much the more ought our love to increase. The
meaning in that case would be, “That your love may increase according to
the measure of knowledge.”All knowledge, means what is full and complete
— not a knowledge of all things. ft48
10. That ye may approve the things that are. Here we have a definition of
Christian wisdom — to know what is advantageous or expedient — not to
torture the mind with empty subtleties and speculations. For the Lord
does not wish that his believing people should employ themselves
fruitlessly in learning what is of no profit: From this you may gather in
what estimation the Sorbonnic theology ought to be held, in which you
may spend your whole life, and yet not derive more of edification from it
in connection with the hope of a heavenly life, or more of spiritual
advantage, than from the demonstrations of Euclid. Unquestionably,
although it taught nothing false, it well deserves to be execrable, on the
ground that it is a pernicious profanation of spiritual doctrine. For
Scripture is useful, as Paul says, in <550316>2 Timothy 3:16, but there you
will find nothing but cold subtleties of words.

That ye may be sincere. This is the advantage which we derive from
knowledge — not that every one may artfully consult his own interests,
but that we may live in pure conscience in the sight of God.
It is added — and without offense. The Greek word ajproskopoi is
ambiguous. Chrysostom explains it in an active sense — that as he had
desired that they should be pure and upright in the sight of God, so he
now desires that they should lead an honorable life in the sight of men, that
they may not injure their neighbors by any evil examples. This exposition
I do not reject: the passive signification, however, is better suited to the
context, in my opinion. For he desires wisdom for them, with this view —
that they may with unwavering step go forward in their calling until the
day of Christ, as on the other hand it happens through ignorance, f49 that
we frequently slip our foot, stumble, and turn aside. And how many
stumbling blocks Satan from time to time throws in our way, with the
view of either stopping our course altogether, or impeding it, every one of
us knows from his own experience.
11. Filled with the fruits of righteousness. This now belongs to the outward
life, for a good conscience produces its fruits by means of works. Hence he
desires that they may be fruitful in good works for the glory of God. Such
fruits, he says, are by Christ, because they flow from the grace of Christ.
For the beginning of our well-doing is, when we are sanctified by his Spirit,
for he rested upon him, that we might all receive of his fullness.
(<430116>John 1:16.) And as Paul here derives a similitude from trees, we are
wild olive-trees, (<451124>Romans 11:24,) and unproductive, until we are
ingrafted into Christ, who by his living root makes us fruitbearing trees, in
accordance with that saying, (<431501>John 15:1,) I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He at the same time shews the end — that we may promote the
glory of God. For no life is so excellent in appearance as not to be
corrupted and become offensive in the view of God, if it is not directed
towards this object.
Paul’s speaking here of works under the term righteousness, is not at all
inconsistent with the gratuitous righteousness of faith. For it does not
immediately follow that there is righteousness wherever there are the fruits
of righteousness, inasmuch as there is no righteousness in the sight of God,
unless there be a full and complete obedience to the law, which is not
found in any one of the saints, though, nevertheless, they bring forth,

according to the measure, the good and pleasant f50 fruits of righteousness,
and for this reason, that, as God begins righteousness in us, through the
regeneration of the Spirit, so what is wanting is amply supplied through
the remission of sins, in such a way that all righteousness, nevertheless,
depends upon faith.
<500112>PHILIPPIANS 1:12-17
12. But I would ye should
understand, brethren, that the things
which happened unto me have fallen
out rather unto the furtherance of the
gospel;
12. Scire autem vos volo, fratres,
quod, quae mihi acciderunt, magis
in profectum cesserunt Evangelii,
13. So that my bonds in Christ are
manifest in all the palace, and in all
other places;
13. Ut vincula mea in Christo
illustria fuerint in toto praetorio, et
reliquis omnibus locis:
14. And many of the brethren in the
Lord waxing confident by my bonds,
are much more bold to speak the
word without fear.
14. Et multi ex fratribus in
Domino, vinculis meis confisi,
uberius ausi fuerint absque timore
sermonem Dei loqui.
15. Some indeed preach Christ even
of envy and strife; and some also of
good will.
15. Nonnulli quidem per invidiam
et contentionem, alii autem etiam
per benevolentiam, Christum
praedicant.
16. The one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing
to add affliction to my bonds;
16. Alii, inquam, ex contentione
Christum annuntiant, non pure,
existimantes afflictionem se
suscitare meis vinculis:
17. But the other of love, knowing
that I am set for the defense of the
gospel.
17. Alii autem ex caritate, scientes
quod in defensionem Evangelii
positus sim.
12. But I wish you to know. We all know from our own experience, how
much the flesh is wont to be offended by the abasement of the cross. We
allow, indeed, Christ crucified to be preached to us; but when he appears
in connection with his cross, then, as though we were thunderstruck at the
novelty of it, f51 we either avoid him or hold him in abhorrence, and that

not merely in our own persons, but also in the persons of those who
deliver to us the gospel. It may have happened to the Philippians, that
they were in some degree discouraged in consequence of the persecution of
their Apostle. We may also very readily believe, that those bad workmen
f52 who eagerly watched every occasion, however small, of doing injury,
did not refrain from triumphing over the calamity of this holy man, and by
this means making his gospel contemptible. If, however, they were not
successful in this attempt, they might very readily calumniate him by
representing him as hated by the whole world; and at the same time leading
the Philippians to dread, lest, by an unfortunate association with him, f53
they should needlessly incur great dislike among all; for such are the usual
artifices of Satan. The Apostle provides against this danger, when he states
that the gospel had been promoted by means of his bonds. The design,
accordingly, of this detail is, to encourage the Philippians, that they may
not feel deterred f54 by the persecution endured by him.
13. So that my bonds. He employs the expression — in Christ, to mean, in
the affairs, or in the cause of Christ, for he intimates that his bonds had
become illustrious, so as to promote the honor of Christ. f55 The rendering
given by some — through Christ, seems forced. I have also employed the
word illustria (illustrious) in preference to manifesta, (manifest,) — as
having ennobled the gospel by their fame. f56 “Satan, indeed, has attempted
it, and the wicked have thought that it would turn out so, that the gospel
would be destroyed; but God has frustrated both the attempts of the
former and the expectations of the latter, f57 and that in two ways, for
while the gospel was previously obscure and unknown, it has come to be
well known, and not only so, but has even been rendered honorable in the
Praetorium, no less than in the rest of the city.”By the praetorium I
understand the hall and palace of Nero, which Fabius f58 and writers of that
age call Augustale, (the Augustal.) For as the name praetor was at first a
general term, and denoted all magistrates who held the chief sway, (hence it
came that the dictator was called the sovereign praetor, f59) it,
consequently, became customary to employ the term praetorium in war to
mean the tent, either of the consul, f60 or of the person who presided, f61
while in the city it denoted the palace of Caesar, f62 from the time that the
Cesars took possession of the monarchy. f63 Independently of this, the
bench of praetor is also called the praetorium. f64

14. Many of the brethren. By this instance we are taught that the tortures
of the saints, endured by them in behalf of the gospel, are a ground of
confidence f65 to us. It were indeed a dreadful spectacle, and such as might
tend rather to dishearten us, did we see nothing but the cruelty and rage of
the persecutors. When, however, we see at the same time the hand of the
Lord, which makes his people unconquerable, f66 under the infirmity of the
Cross, and causes them to triumph, relying upon this, f67 we ought to
venture farther than we had been accustomed, having now a pledge of our
victory in the persons of our brethren. The knowledge of this ought to
overcome our fears, that we may speak boldly in the midst of dangers.
15. Some indeed. Here is another fruit of Paul’s bonds, that not only were
the brethren stirred up to confidence by his example — some by
maintaining their position, others by becoming more eager to teach — but
even those who wished him evil were on another account stirred up to
publish the gospel.
16. Some, I say, from contention. Here we have a lengthened detail, in
which he explains more fully the foregoing statement; for he repeats that
there are two classes of men that are stirred up by his bonds to preach
Christ — the one influenced by contention, that is, by depraved affection
— the other by pious zeal, as being desirous to maintain along with him
the defense of the gospel. The former, he says, do not preach Christ
purely, because it was not a right zeal. f68 For the term does not apply to
doctrine, because it is possible that the man who teaches most purely,
may, nevertheless, not be of a sincere mind. f69 Now, that this impurity
was in the mind, and did not shew itself in doctrine, may be inferred from
the context. Paul assuredly would have felt no pleasure in seeing the gospel
corrupted; yet he declares that he rejoices in the preaching of those
persons, while it was not simple or sincere.
It is asked, however, how such preaching could be injurious to him? I
answer, that many occasions are unknown to us, inasmuch as we are not
acquainted with the circumstances of the times. It is asked farther, “Since
the gospel cannot be preached but by those that understand it, what
motive induced those persons to persecute the doctrine of which they
approved?”I answer, that ambition is blind, nay, it is a furious beast.
Hence it is not to be wondered if false brethren snatch a weapon from the
gospel for harassing good and pious pastors. f71 Paul, assuredly, says

nothing here f70 of which I have not myself had experience. For there are
living at this very day those who have preached the gospel with no other
design, than that they might gratify the rage of the wicked by persecuting
pious pastors. As to Paul’s enemies, it is of importance to observe, if they
were Jews, how mad their hatred was, so as even to forget on what
account they hated him. For while they made it their aim to destroy him,
they exerted themselves to promote the gospel, on account of which they
were hostile to him; but they imagined, no doubt, that the cause of Christ
would stand or fall f72 in the person of one individual. If, however, there
were envious persons, f73 who were thus hurried away by ambition, we
ought to acknowledge the wonderful goodness of God, who,
notwithstanding, gave such a prosperous issue to their depraved
affections.
17. That for the defense. Those who truly loved Christ reckoned that it
would be a disgrace to them if they did not associate themselves with Paul
as his companions, when maintaining the cause of the gospel; and we must
act in such a manner, as to give a helping hand, as far as possible, to the
servants of Christ when in difficulty. f74 Observe, again, this expression —
for the defense of the gospel. For since Christ confers upon us so great an
honor, what excuse shall we have, if we shall be traitors to his cause, f75 or
what may we expect, if we betray it by our silence, but that he shall in
return desert our cause, who is our sole Advocate, or Patron, with the
Father? f76 (<620201>1 John 2:1.)

<500118>PHILIPPIANS 1:18-21
18. What then? notwithstanding,
every way, whether in pretense, or
in truth, Christ is preached; and I
therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice.
18. Quid enim? Caeterum quovis
modo, sive per occasionem, sive
per veritatem, Christus
annuntiatur: atque in hoc gaudeo,
quin etiam gaudebo.
19. For I know that this shall turn to
my salvation through your prayer,
and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ,
19. Novi enim quod hoc mihi cedet
in salutem per vestram
precationem, et subministrationem
Spiritus Iesu Christi,
20. According to my earnest
expectation and my hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed, but that
with all boldness, as always, so now
also Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life, or by
death.
20. Secundum expectationem et
spem meam, quod in nullo re
pudefiam, sed cum omni fiducia,
quemadmodum semper, ita et nunc
magnificabitur Christus in corpore
meo, sive per vitam, sive per
mortem.
21. For to me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain.
21. Mihi enim vivendo Christus
est, et moriendo lucrum.
18. But in every way. As the wicked disposition of those of whom he has
spoken might detract from the acceptableness of the doctrine, f77 he says
that this ought to be reckoned of great importance, that they nevertheless
promoted the cause of the gospel, whatever their disposition might be. For
God sometimes accomplishes an admirable work by means of wicked and
depraved instruments. Accordingly, he says that he rejoices in a happy
result of this nature; because this one thing contented him — if he saw the
kingdom of Christ increasing — just as we, on hearing that that impure dog
Carolus f78 was scattering the seeds of pure doctrine at Avignon and
elsewhere, we gave thanks to God because he had made use of that most
profligate and worthless villain for his glory: and at this day we rejoice that
the progress of the gospel is advanced by many who, nevertheless, had
another design in view. But though Paul rejoiced in the advancement of the
gospel, yet, had the matter been in his hand, he would never have ordained
such persons as ministers. We ought, therefore, to rejoice if God
accomplishes anything that is good by means of wicked persons; but they

ought not on that account to be either placed by us in the ministry, or
looked upon as Christ’s lawful ministers.
19. For I know that. As some published the gospel with the view of
rendering Paul odious, in order that they might kindle up against him the
more the rage of his enemies, he tells them beforehand that their wicked
attempts will do him no harm, because the Lord will turn them to a
contrary design. “Though they plot my destruction, yet I trust that all
their attempts will have no other effect but that Christ will be glorified in
me — which is a thing most salutary to me.” For it is evident from what
follows, that he is not speaking of the safety of the body. But whence this
confidence on the part of Paul? It is from what he teaches elsewhere,
(<450828>Romans 8:28,) — that all things contribute to the advantage of
God’s true worshippers, even though the whole world, with the devil, its
prince, should conspire together for their ruin.
Through your prayer. That he may stir them up to pray more ardently, he
declares that he is confident that the Lord will give them an answer to their
prayers. Nor does he use dissimulation: for he who depends for help on
the prayers of the saints relies on the promise of God. In the mean time,
nothing is detracted from the unmerited goodness of God, on which
depend our prayers, and what is obtained by means of them.
And the supply. Let us not suppose, that because he joins these two things
in one connection, they are consequently alike. The statement must,
therefore, be explained in this manner: — “I know that all this will turn out
to my advantage, through the administration of the Spirit, you also helping
by prayer,”— so that the supply of the Spirit is the efficient cause, while
prayer is a subordinate help. We must also observe the propriety of the
Greek term, for ejpicorhgi>a is employed to mean the furnishing of what is
wanting, ft79 just as the Spirit of God pours into us everything of which we
are destitute.
He calls him, too, the Spirit of Jesus Christ, to intimate, that if we are
Christians, he is common to all of us, inasmuch as he was poured upon
him with all fullness, that, according to the measure of his grace, he might
give out, so far as is expedient, to each of his members.
20. According to my expectation. Should any one object, “From what do
you derive that knowledge?”he answers, “From hope.”For as it is certain

that God does not by any means design to frustrate our hope, hope itself
ought not to be wavering. Let then the pious reader carefully observe this
adverb secundum, (according to,) that he may be fully assured in his own
mind, that it is impossible but that the Lord will fulfill our expectation,
inasmuch as it is founded on his own word. Now, he has promised that he
will never be wanting to us even in the midst of all tortures, if we are at
any time called to make confession of his name. Let, therefore, all the
pious entertain hope after Paul’s example, and they will not be put to
shame.
With all confidence. We see that, in cherishing hope, he does not give
indulgence to carnal desires, but places his hope in subjection to the
promise of God. “Christ,”says he, “will be magnified in my body, whether
by life or by death.”By making express mention, however, of the body, he
intimates that, amongst the conflicts of the present life, he is in no degree
doubtful as to the issue, for we are assured as to this by God. If,
accordingly, giving ourselves up to the good pleasure of God, and having in
our life the same object in view as Paul had, we expect, in whatever way it
may be, a prosperous issue, we shall no longer have occasion to fear lest
any adversity should befall us; for if we live and die to him, we are his in
life and in death. (<451408>Romans 14:8.) He expresses the way in which
Christ will be magnified — by full assurance. Hence it follows, that
through our fault he is cast down and lowered, so far as it is in our power
to do so, when we give way through fear. Do not those then feel ashamed
who reckon it a light offense to tremble, f80 when called to make confession
of the truth? But how much ashamed ought those to feel, who are so
shamelessly impudent as to have the hardihood even to excuse
renunciation?
He adds, as always, that they may confirm their faith from past experience
of the grace of God. Thus, in <450504>Romans 5:4, he says, Experience
begets hope.
21. For to me to live. Interpreters have hitherto, in my opinion, given a
wrong rendering and exposition to this passage; for they make this
distinction, that Christ was life to Paul, and death was gain. I, on the other
hand, make Christ the subject of discourse in both clauses, so that he is
declared to be gain in him both in life and in death; for it is customary with
the Greeks to leave the word pro>v to be understood. Besides that this

meaning is less forced, it also corresponds better with the foregoing
statement, and contains more complete doctrine. He declares that it is
indifferent to him, and is all one, whether he lives or dies, because, having
Christ, he reckons both to be gain. And assuredly it is Christ alone that
makes us happy both in death and in life; otherwise, if death is miserable,
life is in no degree happier; so that it is difficult to determine whether it is
more advantageous to live or to die out of Christ. On the other hand, let
Christ be with us, and he will bless our life as well as our death, so that
both will be happy and desirable for us.
<500122>PHILIPPIANS 1:22-26
22. But if I live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor: yet what I shall
choose I wot not.
22. Quodsi vivere in carne operae
pretium mihi est, etiam quid eligam
ignoro. f81
23. For I am in a strait betwixt two,
having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ; which is far better:
23. Coarctor enim ex duobus
cupiens dissolvi et esse cum
Christo: multo enim hoc melius.
24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh
is more needful for you.
24. Manere vero in carne, magis
necessarium propter vos.
25. And having this confidence, I
know that I shall abide and continue
with you all, for your furtherance
and joy of faith;
25. Atque hoc confisus novi, quod
manebo et permanebo cum
omnibus vobis, in vestrum
profectum et gaudium fidei,
26. That your rejoicing may be more
abundant in Jesus Christ for me, by
my coming to you again.
26. Ut gloriatio vestra exsuperet in
Christo Iesu de me, per meum
rursus adventum ad vos.
22. But if to live in the flesh. As persons in despair feel in perplexity as to
whether they ought to prolong their life any farther in miseries, or to
terminate their troubles by death, so Paul, on the other hand, says that he
is, in a spirit of contentment, so well prepared for death or for life, because
the condition of believers, both in the one case and in the other, is blessed,
so that he is at a loss which to choose. If it is worth while; that is, “If I
have reason to believe that there will be greater advantage from my life
than from my death, I do not see which of them I ought to prefer.”To live

in the flesh, is an expression which he has made use of in contempt, from
comparing it with a better life.
23. For I am in a strait. Paul did not desire to live with any other object in
view that that of promoting the glory of Christ, and doing good to the
brethren. Hence he does not reckon that he has any other advantage from
living than the welfare of the brethren. But so far as concerns himself
personally, it were, he acknowledges, better for him to die soon, because
he would be with Christ. By his choice, however, he shews what ardent
love glowed in his breast. There is nothing said here as to earthly
advantages, but as to spiritual benefit, which is on good grounds
supremely desirable in the view of the pious. Paul, however, as if forgetful
of himself, does not merely hold himself undetermined, lest he should be
swayed by a regard to his own benefit rather than that of the Philippians,
but at length concludes that a regard to them preponderates in his mind.
And assuredly this is in reality to live and die to Christ, when, with
indifference as to ourselves, we allow ourselves to be carried and borne
away withersoever Christ calls us.
Having a desire to be set free and to be with Christ. These two things must
be read in connection. For death of itself will never be desired, because
such a desire is at variance with natural feeling, but is desired for some
particular reason, or with a view to some other end. Persons in despair
have recourse to it from having become weary of life; believers, on the
other hand, willingly hasten forward to it, because it is a deliverance from
the bondage of sin, and an introduction into the kingdom of heaven. What
Paul now says is this; “I desire to die, because I will, by this means, come
into immediate connection with Christ.”In the mean time, believers do not
cease to regard death with horror, but when they turn their eyes to that life
which follows death, they easily overcome all dread by means of that
consolation. Unquestionably, every one that believes in Christ ought to be
so courageous as to lift up his head on mention being made of death,
delighted to have intimation of his redemption. (<422128>Luke 21:28.) From
this we see how many are Christians only in name, since the greater part,
on hearing mention made of death, are not merely alarmed, but are rendered
almost lifeless through fear, as though they had never heard a single word
respecting Christ. O the worth and value of a good conscience! Now faith
is the foundation of a good conscience; nay more, it is itself goodness of
conscience.

To be set free. This form of expression is to be observed. Profane persons
speak of death as the destruction of man, as if he altogether perished. Paul
here reminds us, that death is the separation of the soul from the body.
And this he expresses more fully immediately afterwards, explaining as to
what condition awaits believers after death — that of dwelling with Christ.
We are with Christ even in this life, inasmuch as the kingdom of God is
within us, (<421721>Luke 17:21,) and Christ dwells in us by faith,
(<490317>Ephesians 3:17,) and has promised that he will be with us even
unto the end of the world, (<402820>Matthew 28:20,) but that presence we
enjoy only in hope. Hence as to our feeling, we are said to be at present at
a distance from him. See <470506>2 Corinthians 5:6. This passage is of use
for setting aside the mad fancy of those who dream that souls sleep when
separated from the body, for Paul openly declares that we enjoy Christ’s
presence on being set free from the body.
25. And having this confidence. Some, reckoning it an inconsistent thing
that the Apostle ft82 should acknowledge himself to have been disappointed
of his expectation, are of opinion that he was afterwards freed from bonds,
and went over many countries of the world. Their fears, however, as to
this are groundless, for the saints are accustomed to regulate their
expectations according to the word of God, so as not to promise
themselves more than God has promised. Thus, when they have a sure
token of God’s will, they in that case place their reliance also upon a sure
persuasion, which admits of no hesitation. Of this nature is a persuasion
respecting a perpetual remission of sins, respecting the aid of the Spirit for
the grace of final perseverance, (as it is called,) and respecting the
resurrection of the flesh. Of this nature, also, was the assurance of the
Prophets respecting their prophecies. As to other things, they expect
nothing except conditionally, and hence they subject all events to the
providence of God, who, they allow, sees more distinctly than they. To
remain, means here, to stay for a little while: to continue, means, to remain
for a long time.
26. That your glorying. The expression which he employs, ejn ejmo>i, I have
rendered de me (as to me,) because the preposition is made use of twice,
but in different senses. No one assuredly will deny that I have faithfully
brought out Paul’s mind. The rendering given by some — per Christum,
(through Christ,) I do not approve of. For in Christ is employed in place
of Secundum Christum, (According to Christ,) or Christiane, (Christianly,)

to intimate that it was a holy kind of glorying. For otherwise we are
commanded to glory in God alone. (<460131>1 Corinthians 1:31.) Hence
malevolent persons might meet Paul with the objection, How is it
allowable for the Philippians to glory as to thee? He anticipates this
calumny by saying that they will do this according to Christ — glorying in
a servant of Christ, with a view to the glory of his Lord, and that with an
eye to the doctrine rather than to the individual, and in opposition to the
false apostles, just as David, by comparing himself with hypocrites,
boasts of his righteousness. (<190708>Psalm 7:8.)
<500127>PHILIPPIANS 1:27-30
27. Only let your conversation be as
it becometh the gospel of Christ:
that whether I come and see you, or
else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye stand fast in one
spirit, with one mind striving
together for the faith of the gospel;
27. Tantum digne Evangelio
Christi conversamini: ut sive
veniens videam vos, sive absens,
audiam de vobis, quod stetis in
uno spiritu, una anima,
concertantes fide Evangelii.
28. And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries: which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but to
you of salvation, and that of God.
28. Nec ulla in re terreamini ab
adversariis, quae illis est
demonstratio exitii: vobis autem
salutis, idque a Deo.
29. For unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on him, but also to suffer for his
sake;
29. Quia vobis donatum est pro
Christo, non tantum ut in illum
credatis, sed etiam ut pro ipso
patiamini:
30. Having the same conflict which
ye saw in me, and now hear to be in
me.
30. Idem habentes certamen,
quale vidistis in me, et nunc
auditis de me.
27. Only in a manner worthy of the gospel. We make use of this form of
expression, when we are inclined to pass on to a new subject. Thus it is as
though he had said, “But as for me, the Lord will provide, but as for you,
etc., whatever may take place as to me, let it be your care, nevertheless, to
go forward in the right course.”When he speaks of a pure and honorable
conversation as being worthy of the gospel, he intimates, on the other
hand, that those who live otherwise do injustice to the gospel.

That whether I come. As the Greek phrase made use of by Paul is
elliptical, I have made use of videam, (I see,) instead of videns (seeing.) If
this does not appear satisfactory, you may supply the principal verb
Intelligam, (I may learn,) in this sense: “Whether, when I shall come and
see you, or whether I shall, when absent, hear respecting your condition, I
may learn in both ways, both by being present and by receiving
intelligence, that ye stand in one spirit.”We need not, however, feel anxiety
as to particular terms, when the meaning is evident.
Stand in one spirit. This, certainly, is one of the main excellences of the
Church, and hence this is one means of preserving it in a sound state,
inasmuch as it is torn to pieces by dissensions. But although Paul was
desirous by means of this antidote to provide against novel and strange
doctrines, yet he requires a twofold unity — of spirit and soul. The first is,
that we have like views; the second, that we be united in heart. For when
these two terms are connected together, spiritus (spirit) denotes the
understanding, while anima (soul) denotes the will. Farther, agreement of
views comes first in order; and then from it springs union of inclination.
Striving together for the faith. This is the strongest bond of concord, when
we have to fight together under the same banner, for this has often been the
occasion of reconciling even the greatest enemies. Hence, in order that he
may confirm the more the unity that existed among the Philippians, he
calls them to notice that they are fellow-soldiers, who, having a common
enemy and a common warfare, ought to have their minds united together in
a holy agreement. The expression which Paul has made use of in the Greek
(sunaqlou~ntev th~| pi>stei) is ambiguous. The old interpreter renders it
Collaborantes fidei, (laboring together with the faith.) f84 Erasmus renders it
Adiuvantes fidem, (Helping the faith,) as if meaning, that they gave help to
the faith to the utmost of their power. As, however, the dative in Greek is
made use of instead of the ablative of instrumentality, (that language
having no ablative,) I have no doubt that the Apostle’s meaning is this:
“Let the faith of the gospel unite you together, more especially as that is a
common armory against one and the same enemy.”In this way the particle
su>n, which others refer to faith, I take as referring to the Philippians, and
with greater propriety, if I am not mistaken. In the first place, every one is
aware how effectual an inducement it is to concord, when we have to
maintain a conflict together; and farther, we know that in the spiritual
warfare we are armed with the shield of faith, (<490616>Ephesians 6:16,) for

repelling the enemy; nay, more, faith is both our panoply and our victory.
Hence he added this clause, that he might shew what is the end of a pious
connection. The wicked, too, conspire together for evil, but their agreement
is accursed: let us, therefore, contend with one mind under the banner of
faith.
28. And in nothing terrified. The second thing which he recommends to the
Philippians is fortitude of mind, f85 that they may not be thrown into
confusion by the rage of their adversaries. At that time the most cruel
persecutions raged almost everywhere, because Satan strove with all his
might to impede the commencement of the gospel, and was the more
enraged in proportion as Christ put forth powerfully the grace of his
Spirit. He exhorts, therefore, the Philippians to stand forward undaunted,
and not be thrown into alarm.
Which is to them a manifest proof. This is the proper meaning of the Greek
word, and there was no consideration that made it necessary for others to
render it cause. For the wicked, when they wage war against the Lord, do
already by a trial-fight, as it were, give a token of their ruin, and the more
fiercely they insult over the pious, the more do they prepare themselves
for ruin. The Scripture, assuredly, nowhere teaches, that the afflictions
which the saints endure from the wicked are the cause of their salvation,
but Paul in another instance, too, speaks of them as a manifest token or
proof, (<530105>2 Thessalonians 1:5,) and instead of e]ndeixin, which we
have here, he in that passage makes use of the term e]ndeigma. f86 This,
therefore, is a choice consolation, that when we are assailed and harassed
by our enemies, we have an evidence of our salvation. f87 For persecutions
are in a manner seals of adoption to the children of God, if they endure
them with fortitude and patience: the wicked give a token of their
condemnation, because they stumble against a stone by which they shall
be bruised to pieces. (<402144>Matthew 21:44.)
And that from God. This is restricted to the last clause, that a taste of the
grace of God may allay the bitterness of the cross. No one will naturally
perceive the cross a token or evidence of salvation, for they are things that
are contrary in appearance. Hence Paul calls the attention of the
Philippians to another consideration — that God by his blessing turns into
an occasion of welfare things that might otherwise seem to render us
miserable. He proves it from this, that the endurance of the cross is the gift

of God. Now it is certain, that all the gifts of God are salutary to us. To
you, says he, it is given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for
him. Hence even the sufferings themselves are evidences of the grace of
God; and, since it is so, you have from this source a token of salvation.
Oh, if this persuasion were effectually inwrought in our minds — that
persecutions f88 are to be reckoned among God’s benefits, what progress
would be made in the doctrine of piety! f89 And yet, what is more certain,
than that it is the highest honor that is conferred upon us by Divine grace,
that we suffer for his name either reproach, or imprisonment, or miseries,
or tortures, or even death, for in that case he adorns us with his markes of
distinction. f90 But more will be found that will rather bid God retire with
gifts of that nature, than embrace with alacrity the cross when it is
presented to them. Alas, then, for our stupidity! f91
29. To believe. He wisely conjoins faith with the cross by an inseparable
connection, that the Philippians may know that they have been called to
the faith of Christ on this condition — that they endure persecutions on
his account, as though he had said that their adoption can no more be
separated from the cross, than Christ can be torn asunder from himself.
Here Paul clearly testifies, that faith, as well as constancy in enduring
persecutions, f92 is an unmerited gift of God. And certainly the knowledge
of God is a wisdom that is too high for our attaining it by our own
acuteness, and our weakness shews itself in daily instances in our own
experience, when God withdraws his hand for a little while. That he may
intimate the more distinctly that both are unmerited, he says expressly —
for Christ’s sake, or at least that they are given to us on the ground of
Christ’s grace; by which he excludes every idea of merit.
This passage is also at variance with the doctrine of the schoolmen, in
maintaining that gifts of grace latterly conferred are rewards of our merit,
on the ground of our having made a right use of those which had been
previously bestowed. I do not deny, indeed, that God rewards the right
use of his gifts of grace by bestowing grace more largely upon us, provided
only you do not place merit, as they do, in opposition to his unmerited
liberality and the merit of Christ.
30. Having the same conflict. He confirms, also, by his own example what
he had said, and this adds no little authority to his doctrine. By the same
means, too, he shews them, that there is no reason why they should feel

troubled on account of his bonds, when they behold the issue of the
conflict.

