CHAPTER 4
<500401>PHILIPPIANS 4:1-3
1. Therefore, my brethren, dearly
beloved and longed for, my joy and
corwn, so stand fast in the Lord, my
dearly beloved.
1. Itaque, fratres mei dilecti et
desiderati, gaudium et corona mea,
sic state in Domino, dilecti.
2. I beseech Eudodias, and beseech
Syntche, that they beof the same
mind in the Lord.
2. Euodian hortor, et Syntchen
hortor, ut unum sentiant in
Domino.
3. And I entreat thee also, true yoke-
fellow, help those women which
labored with me in the gospel, with
Clement also,and with other my
fellow-laborers, whose names are in
the book of life.
3. Sane rogo etiam to, germane
compar, adiuva eas, quae in
evangelio idem mecum certamen
sustinuerunt, cum Clemente
etiam, et reliquis adiutoribus meis,
quorum nomina sunt in libro
vitae.
1. Therefore, my brethren. He concludes his doctrine, as he is wont, with
most urgent exhortations, that he may fix it the more firmly in the minds of
men. He also insinuates himself into their affections by endearing
appellations f206, which at the same time are not dictated by flattery, but
by sincere affection. He calls them his joy and crown; because, delighted to
see those who had been gained over through his instrumentality
persevering in the faith f207, he hoped to attain that triumph, of which we
have spoken f208, when the Lord will reward with a crown those things
which have been accomplished under his guidance.
When he bids them so stand fast in the Lord, he means that their condition
is approved of by him. At the same time, the particle so might be taken as
referring to the doctrine going before; but the former view is more suitable,
so that, by praising their present condition, he exhorts them to
perseverance. They had already, it is true, given some evidence of their
constancy. Paul, however, well knowing human weakness, reckons that
they have need of confirmation for the future.

2. 1 exhort Euodias and Syntyche. It is an almost universally received
opinion that Paul was desirous to settle a quarrel, I know not of what sort,
between those two women. While I am not inclined to contend as to this,
the words of Paul do not afford ground enough for such a conjecture to
satisfy us that it really was so. It appears, from the testimony which he
gives in their favor, that they were very excellent women; for he assigns to
them so much honor as to call them fellow-soldiers in the gospel f209.
Hence, as their agreement was a matter of great moment f210, and, on the
other hand, there would be great danger attendant on their disagreement, he
stirs them up particularly to concord.
We must take notice, however, that, whenever he speaks of agreement, he
adds also the bond of it—in the Lord. For every combination will
inevitably be accursed, if apart from the Lord, and, on the other hand,
nothing is so disjoined, but that it ought to be reunited in Christ.
3. I entreat thee, also, true yokefellow. I am not inclined to dispute as to the
gender of the noun, and shall, accordingly, leave it undetermined f211,
whether he addresses here a man or a woman. At the same time there is
excessive weakness in the argument of Erasmus, who infers that it is a
woman from the circumstance, that mention is made here of other
women—as though he did not immediately subjoin the name of Clement in
the same connection. I refrain, however, from that dispute: only I maintain
that it is not Paul’s wife that is designated by this appellation. Those who
maintain this, quote Clement and Ignatius as their authorities. If they
quoted correctly, I would not certainly despise men of such eminence. But
as writings are brought forward from Eusebius f212 which are spurious, and
were contrived by ignorant monks f213, they are not deserving of much
credit among readers of sound judgment f214.
Let us, therefore, inquire as to the thing itself, without taking any false
impression from the opinions of men. When Paul wrote the First Epistle
to the Corinthians, he was, as he mentions, at that time unmarried.
To the unmarried, says he, and widows, I say ⋅ it is good that they
should continue even as I am (<460708>1 Corinthians 7:8.)
 He wrote that Epistle at Ephesus f215 whenhe was prepared to leave it.
Not long after, he proceeded to Jerusalem, where he was put in prison, and
sent to Rome. Every one must perceive how unsuitable a period of time it

would have been for marrying a wife, spent by him partly in journeying,
and partly in prison. In addition to this, he was even at that time prepared
to endure imprisonment and persecutions, as he himself testifies, according
to Luke. (<442101>Acts 21:1.3.) I am, at the same time, well aware what
objection is usually brought forward in opposition to thist— that Paul,
though married, refrained from conjugal intercourse. The words, however,
convey another meaning, for he is desirous that unmarried persons may
have it in their power to remain in the same condition with himself. Now,
what is that condition but celibacy? As to their bringing forward that
passage—
Is it not lawful for me to lead about a wife (I Corinthians 9:5,)
for the purpose of proving he had a wife, it is too silly to require any
refutation f216. But granting that Paul was married, how came his wife to be
at Philippi—a city which we do not read of his entering on more than two
occasions, and in which it is probable he never remained so much as two
whole months? In fine, nothing is more unlikely than that he speaks here
of his wife; and to me it does not seem probable that he speaks of any
female. I leave it, however, to the judgment of my readers. The word which
Paul makes use of here (sulla>mbanesqai) means, to take hold of a thing
and embrace it along with another person, with the view of giving help f217.
Whose names are in the book of life. The book of life is the roll of the
righteous, who are predestinated to life, as in the writings of Moses.
(<023232>Exodus 32:32.) God has this roll beside himself in safe keeping.
Hence the book is nothing else than His eternal counsel, fixed in His own
breast. In place of this term, Ezekiel employs this expression—the writing
of the house of Israel. With the same view it is said in
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and let them not
be written among the righteous; (<196929>Psalm 69:29)
that is, let them not be numbered among the elect of God, whom he
receives within the limits of his Church and kingdom f218.
Should any one allege, that Paul therefore acts rashly in usurping to
himself the right of pronouncing as to the secrets of God, I answer, that we
may in some measure form a judgment from the token by which God
manifests his election, but only in so far as our capacity admits. In all
those, therefore, in whom we see the marks of adoption shine forth, let us

in the mean time reckon those to be the sons of God until the books are
opened, (<662012>Revelation 20:12,) which will thoroughly bring all things
to view. It belongs, it is true, to God alone now to know them that are his,
(<550219>2 Timothy 2:19,) and to separate at least the lambs from the kids;
f219 but it is our part to reckon in charity all to be lambs who, in a spirit of
obedience, submit themselves to Christ as their Shepherd f220, who betake
themselves to his fold, and remain there constantly. It is our part to set so
high a value upon the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which he confers peculiarly
on his elect, that they shall be to us the seals, as it were, of an election
which is hid from us.
<500404>PHILIPPIANS 4:4-9
4. Rejoice in the Lord alway: and
again I say, Rejoice.
4. Gaudete in Domino semper,
iterum dico, gaudete.
5. Let your moderation be known
unto all men. The Lord is at hand.
5. Moderatio vestra nota sit omnibus
hominibus. Dominus prope est.
6. Be careful for nothing: but in
everything by prayer and supplicaiton,
with thanksgiving, let your requests be
made known unto God.
6. De nulla re sitis solliciti: sed in
omnibus, oratione et precatione,
cum gratiarum actione, petitiones
vestrae innotescant apud Deum.
7. And the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus.
7. Et pax Dei, quae exsuperat
omnem intelligentiam, custodiet
corda vestra et cogitationes
vestras in Christo Iesu.
8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virture, and if there
be any praise, think on these things.
8. Quod reliquum est, fratres,
quaecunque sunt vera,
quaecunque gravia, qaecunque
iusta, quaecunque pura,
quaecunque amabilia,quaecunque
honesta: si qua virtus, et qua laus,
haec cogitate.
9. Those things, which ye have both
learned, and received, and heard, and
seen in me, do: and the God of peace
shall be with you.
9. Quae et didicistis, et
suscepistis, et audistis, et vidistis
in me: haec facite, et Deus pacis
erit vobiscum.

4. Rejoice in the Lord. It is an exhortation suited to the times; for, as the
condition of the pious was exceedingly troublous, and dangers threatened
them on every side, it was possible that they might give way, overcome by
grief or impatience f221.Hence he enjoins it upon them, that, amidst
circumstances of hostility and disturbance, they should nevertheless
rejoice in the Lord f222, as assuredly these spiritual consolations, by means
of which the Lord refreshes and gladdens us, ought then most of all to
show their efficacy when the whole world tempts us to despair. Let us,
however, in connection with the circumstances of the times, consider what
efficacy there must have been in this word uttered by the mouth of Paul,
who might have had special occasion of sorrow f223 For if they are appalled
by persecutions, or imprisonments, or exile, or death, here is the Apostle
setting himself forward, who, amidst imprisonments, in the very heat of
persecution, and in fine, amidst apprehensions of death, is not merely
himself joyful, but even stirs up others to joy. The sum, then, is this—that
come what may, believers, having the Lord standing on their side f224, have
amply sufficient ground of joy.
The repetition of the exhortation serves to give greater force to it: Let this
be your strength and stability, to rejoice in the Lord, and that, too, not for
a moment merely, but so that your joy in him may be perpetuated f225. For
unquestionably it differs from the joy of the world in this respect - that we
know from experience that the joy of the world is deceptive, frail, and
fading, and Christ even pronouces it to be accursed (<420625>Luke 6:25).
Hence, tht only is a settled joy in God which is such as is never taken
away from us.
5. Your moderation. This may be explained in two ways. We may
understand him as bidding them rather give up their right, than that any
one should have occasion to complain of their sharpness or severity. “Let
all that have to deal with you have experience of your equity and
humanity.”In this way to know, will mean to experience. Or we may
understand him as exhorting them to endure all things with equanimity f226.
This latter meaning I rather prefer; for is a term that is made use of by the
Greeks themselves to denote moderation of spirit—when we are not easily
moved by injuries, when we are not easily annoyed by adversity, but
retain equanimity of temper. In accordance with this, Cicero makes use of
the following expression,— “My mind is tranquil, which takes everything
in good part.” f227 Such equanimity—which is as it were the mother of

patience —he requires here on the part of the Philippians, and, indeed,
such as will manifest itself to all, according as occasion will require, by
producing its proper effects. The term modesty does not seem appropriate
here, because Paul is not in this passage cautioning them against haughty
insolence, but directs them to conduct themselves peaceably in everything,
and exercise control over themselves, even in the endurance of injuries or
inconveniences.
The Lord is at hand. Here we have an aaticipation, by which he obviates
an objection that might be brought forward. For carnal sense rises in
opposition to the foregoing statement. For as the rage of the wicked is the
more inflamed in proportion to our mildness f228, and the more they see us
prepared for enduring, are the more emboldened to inflict injuries, we are
with difficulty induced to possess our souls in patience. (<422119>Luke
21:19.) Hence those proverbs,— “We must howl when among
wolves.””Those who act like sheep will quickly be devoured by
wolves.”Hence we conclude, that the ferocity of the wicked must be
repressed by corresponding violence, that they may not insult us with
impunity f229. To such considerations Paul here opposes confidence in
Divine providence. He replies, I say, that the Lord is at hand, whose
power can overcome their audacity, and whose goodness can conquer their
malice. He promises that he will aid us, provided we obey his
commandment. Now, who would not rather be protected by the hand of
God alone, than have all the resources of the world at his command?
Here we have a most beautiful sentiment, from which we learn, in the first
place, that ignorance of the providence of God is the cause of all
impatience, and that this is the reason why we are so quickly, and on
trivial accounts, thrown into confusion f230, and often, too, become
disheartened because we do not recognize the fact that the Lord cares for
us. On the other hand, we learn that this is the only remedy for
tranquillizing our minds—when we repose unreservedly in his providential
care, as knowing that we are not exposed either to the rashness of fortune,
or to the caprice of the wicked f231, but are under the regulation of God’s
fatherly care. In fine, the man that is in possession of this truth, that God
is present with him, has what he may rest upon with security.
There are, however, two ways in which the Lord is said to be at hand—
either because his judgment is at hand, or because he is prepared to give

help to his own people, in which sense it is made use of here; and also in
<19E518>Psalm 145:18, The Lord is near to all that call upon him. The
meaning therefore is,— “Miserable were the condition of the pious, if the
Lord were at a distance from them.”But as he has received them under his
protection and guardianship, and defends them by his hand, which is
everywhere present, let them rest upon this consideration, that they may
not be intimidated by the rage of the wicked. It is well known, and matter
of common occurrence, that the term solicitudo (carefulness) is employed
to denote that anxiety which proceeds from distrust of Divine power or
help.
6. But in all things. It is the singular number that is made use of by Paul,
but is the neuter gender; the expression, therefore, is equivalent to omni
negotio, (in every matter,) for (prayer) and (supplication) are feminine
nouns. In these words he exhorts the Philippians, as David does all the
pious in <195522>Psalm 55:22, and Peter also in <600507>1 Peter 5:7, to cast
all their care upon the Lord. For we are not made of iron f232, so as not to
be shaken by temptations. But this is our consolation, this is our solace —
to deposit, or (to speak with greater propriety) to disburden in the bosom
of God everything that harasses us. Confidence, it is true, brings
tranquil!ity to our minds, but it is only in the event of our exercising
ourselves in prayers. Whenever, therefore, we are assailed by any
temptation, let us betake ourselves forthwith to prayer, as to a sacred
asylum. f233.
The term requests he employs here to denote desires or wishes. He would
have us make these known to God by prayer and supplication, as though
believers poured forth their hearts before God, when they commit
themselves, and all that they have, to Him. Those, indeed, who look hither
and thither to the vain comforts of the world, may appear to be in some
degree relieved; but there is one sure refuge—-leaning upon the Lord.
With thanksgiving As many often pray to God amiss f234, full of
complaints or of murmurings, as though they had just ground for accusing
him, while others cannot brook delay, if he does not immediately gratify
their desires, Paul on this account conjoins thanksgiving with prayers. It is
as though he had said, that those things which are necessary for us ought
to be desired by us from the Lord in such a way, that we, nevertheless,
subject our affections to his good pleasure, and give thanks while

presenting petitions. And, unquestionably, gratitude f235 will have this
effect upon us—that the will of God will be the grand sum of our desires.
7. And the peace of God. Some, by turning the future tense into the
optative mood, convert this statement into a prayer, but it is without
proper foundation. For it is a promise in which he points out the
advantage of a firm confidence in God, and invocation of him. “If you do
that,”says he, “the peace of God will keep your minds and hearts.”
Scripture is accustomed to divide the soul of man, as to its frailties, into
two parts—the mind and the heart. The mind means the understanding,
while the heart denotes all the disposition or inclinations. These two terms,
therefore, include the entire soul, in this sense,— “The peace of God will
guard you, so as to prevent you from turning back from God in wicked
thoughts or desires.”
It is on good ground that he calls it the peace of God, inasmuch as it does
not depend on the present aspect of things f236, and does not bend itself to
the various shiftings of the world f237, but is founded on the firm and
immutable word of God. It is on good grounds, also, that he speaks of it as
surpassing all understanding or perception, for nothing is more foreign to
the human mind, than in the depth of despair to exercise, nevertheless, a
feeling of hope, in the depth of poverty to see opulence, and in the depth
of weakness to keep from giving way, and, in fine, to promise ourselves
that nothing will be wanting to us when we are left destitute of all things;
and all this in the grace of God alone, which is not itself known otherwise
than through the word, and the inward earnest of the Spirit.
8. Finally. What follows consists of general exhortations which relate to
the whole of life. In the first place, he commends truth, which is nothing
else than the integrity of a good conscience, with the fruits of it: secondly,
gravity, or sanctity, for f238 denotes both—an excellence which consists in
this, that we walk in a manner worthy of our vocation, (<490401>Ephesians
4:1,) keeping at a distance from all profane filthiness: thirdly, justice, which
has to do with the mutual intercourse of mankind—-that we do not injure
any one, that we do not defraud any one: and, fourthly, purity, which
denotes chastity in every department of life. Paul, however, does not
reckon all these things to be sufficient, if we do not at the same time
endeavor to make ourselves agreeable to all, in so far as we may lawfully

do so in the Lord, and have regard also to our good name. For it is in this
way that I understand the words
If any praise f239, that is, anything praiseworthy, for amidst such a
corruption of manners there is so great a perversity in men’s judgments
that praise is often bestowed f240 upon what is blameworthy, and it is not
allowable for Christians to be desirous even of true praise among men,
inasmuch as they are elsewhere forbidden to glory, except in God alone.
(<460131>1 Corinthians 1:31.) Paul, therefore. does not bid them try to gain
applause or commendation by virtuous actions, nor even to regulate their
life according to the judgments of the people, but simply means, that they
should devote themselves to the performance of good works, which merit
commendation, that the wicked, and those who are enemies of the gospel,
while they deride Christians and cast reproach upon them, may,
nevertheless, be constrained to commend their deportment.
The word , however, among the Greeks, is employed, like cogitare among
the Latins, to mean, meditate f241. Now meditation comes first, afterwards
follows action.
9. What things ye have learned, and received, and heard. By this
accumulation of terms he intimates, that he was assiduous in inculcating
these things. “This was my doctrine—my instruction—my discourse
among you.”Hypocrites, on the other hand, insisted upon nothing but
ceremonies. Now, it was a dishonorable thing to abandon the holy
instruction f242,which they had wholly imbibed, and with which they had
been thorouglly imbued.
You have seen in me. Now, the main thing in a public speaker f243 should
be, that he may speak, not with his mouth merely, but by his life, and
procure authority for his doctrine by rectitude of life. Paul, accordingly,
procures authority for his exhortation on this ground, that he had, by his
life no less than by his mouth, been a leader and master of virtues.
And the God of peace. He had spoken of the peace of God; he now more
particularly confirms what he had said, by promising that God himself, the
Author of peace, will be with them. For the presence of God brings us
every kind of blessing: as though he had said, that they would feel that
God was present with them to make all things turn out well and
prosperously, provided they apply themselves to pious and holy actions.

<500410>PHILIPPIANS 4:10-14
10. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly,
that now at the last your care of me
hath flourished again; wherein ye were
also careful, but ye lacked
opportunity
10.Gavisu sum autem in domino
valde, quod aliquando reviguistis
in studio mei, de quo etiam
cogitabatis, sed deerat
opportunitas.
11. Not that I speak in respect of
want: for I ahve learned, in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.
11.Non quod secundum penuriam
loquar;;ego enim didici, in quibus
sum, iis contentus esse.
12. I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound;
everywhere, and in all things, I am
instructed both to be full and be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need.
12. Novi et humilis esse, novi et
excellere: ubique et in omnibus
institutus sum, et saturari, et
esurire, et abundare, et penuriam
pati.
13. I can do all things through Christ
which strengthened me.
13.Omnia possum in Christo, qui
me corroborat.
14. Notwithstanding ye have well
done that ye did communicate with
my affliction.
14. Caeterum benefecistis simul
communicando afflictioni meae.
10. But I rejoiced. He now declares the gratitude of his mind towards the
Philippians, that they may not regret their beneficence F244, as is usually
the case when we think that our services are despised, or are reckoned of
no account. They had sent him by Epaphroditus supplies for the relief of
his necessity; he declares that their present had been acceptable to him,
and he says, that he rejoiced that they had plucked up new vigor so as to
exercise care respecting him. The metaphor is borrowed from trees, the
strength of which is drawn inward, and lies concealed during winter, and
begins to flourish F245 in spring. But immediately afterwards subjoining a
correction, he qualifies what he had said, that he may not seem to reprove
their negligence in the past. He says, therefore, that they had formerly,
too, been concerned respecting him, but that the circumstances of the times
had not admitted of his being sooner relieved by their benignity. Thus he
throws the blame upon the want of opportunity. I take the phrase as

referring to the person of Paul, and that is its proper signification, as well
as more in accordance with the connection of Paul’s words.
11. Not that I speak with respect to want. Here we have a second
correction, by which he guards against its being suspected that his spirit
was pusillanimous and broken down by adversities. For it was of
importance that his constancy and moderation should be known by the
Philippians, to whom he was a pattern of life. Accordingly he declares,
that he had been gratified by their liberality in such a way that he could at
the same time endure want with patience. Want refers here to disposition,
for that man can never be poor in mind, who is satisfied with the lot which
has been assigned to him by God.
In what state I am, says he, that is, “Whatever my condition may be, I am
satisfied with it.”Why? because saints know that they thus please God.
Hence they do not measure sufficiency by abundance, but by the will of
God, which they judge of by what takes place, for they are persuaded that
their affairs are regulated by his providence and good pleasure.
12. I know both how to be abased. There follows here a distinction, with
the view of intimating that he has a mind adapted to bear any kind of
condition F246. Prosperity is wont to puff up the mind beyond measure,
and adversity, on the other hand, to depress. From both faults he declares
himself to be free. I know, says he, to be abased—that is, to endure
abasement with patience. is made use of twice, but in the former instance it
is employed as meaning, to excel; in the second instance, as meaning, to
abound, so as to correspond with the things to which they are exposed. If
a man knows to make use of present abundance in a sober and temperate
manner, with thanksgiving, prepared to part with everything whenever it
may be the good pleasure of the Lord, giving also a share to his brother,
according to the measure of his ability, and is also not puffed up, that man
has learned to excel, and to abound. This is a peculiarly excellent and rare
virtue, and much superior to the endurance of poverty. Let all who wish to
be Christ’s disciples exercise themselves in acquiring this knowledge which
was possessed by Paul, but in the mean time let them accustom
themselves to the endurance of poverty in such a manner that it will not be
grievous and burdensome to them when they come to be deprived of their
riches.

13. I can do all things through Christ. As he had boasted of things that
were very great F247, in order that this might not be attributed to pride or
furnish others with occasion of foolish boasting, he adds, that it is by
Christ that he is endowed with this fortitude. “I can do all things,” says
he, “but it is in Christ, not by my own power, for it is Christ that
supplies me with strength.” Hence we infer, that Christ will not be less
strong and invincible in us also, if, conscious of our own weakness, we
place reliance upon his power alone. When he says all things, he means
merely those things which belong to his calling.
14. Nevertheless ye did well. How prudently and cautiously he acts,
looking round carefully in both directions, that he may not lean too much
to the one side or to the other. By proclaiming in magnificent terms his
steadfastness, he meant to provide against the Philippians supposing that
he had given way under the pressure of want? He now takes care that it
may not, from his speaking in high terms, appear as though he despised
their kindness—a thing that would not merely shew cruelty and obstinacy,
but also haughtiness. He at the same time provides for this, that if any
other of the servants of Christ should stand in need of their assistance they
may not be slow to give him help.

<500415>PHILIPPIANS 4:15-23
15. Now, ye Philippians, know also,
that in the beginnng of the gospel,
when I departed from Macedonia, no
church communicated with me, as
concerning giving and receiving, but ye
only.
15. Nostis autem et vos
Philippenses, quod initio
Evangelii, qunado exivi ex
Macedonia, nulla mecum Ecclesia
in ratione dati et accepti, nisi vos
soli.
16. For even in Thessalonica ye sent
once and again unto my necessity.
16. Nam et Tessalonicam semel
atque iterum mihi, quod opus
erat, misistis:
17. Not because I desire a gift; but I
desire fruit that may abound to your
account.
17. Non quia requiram donum,
sed requiro fructum, qui exsuperet
in rationem vestram.
18. But I have all, and abound: I am
full, having received of Epaphroditus
the things which were sent from you,
an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well-pleasing to God.
18. Accepi autem omnia et
abundo, impletus sum, postquam
ab Epaphrodito accepi, quai missa
sunt a vobis in odorem bonae
fragrantiae, sacrificium acceptum
gractum Deo.
19. But my God shall supply all your
need according to his riches in glory
by Christ Jesus.
19. Deus autem meus implebit,
quicquid vobis opus est,
secundum divitias suas in gloria
per Christum Iesum.
20. Now unto God and our Father be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.
20. Porro Deo et Patri nostro
gloria in secula seculorum. Amen.
21. Salute every saint in Christ Jesus.
The brethren which are with me greet
you.
21. Salutate omnes sanctos in
Christo Iesu. Salutant vos qui
mecum sunt fratres.
22. All the saints salute you, chiefly
they that are of Cesar’s household.
22. Salutant vos omnes sancti:
maxime qui sunt ex domo
Caesaris.
23. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all. Amen.
23. Gratia domini nostri Iesu
Christi cum omnibus vobis.
Amen.
It was written to the Philippians from
Rome by Epaphroditus.
Scripta est a roma per
Epaphroditum.

15. And ye know. I understand this to have been added by way of excuse,
inasmuch as he often received something from them, for if the other
Churches had discharged their duty, it might have seemed as though he
were too eager to receive. Hence in clearing himself he praises them, and in
praising them he modestly excuses others. We must also, after Paul’s
example, take heed lest the pious, on seeing us too much inclined to receive
from others, should on good grounds reckon us to be insatiable. You also
know, says he. “I do not require to call in other witnesses, for ye
yourselves also know.”For it frequently happens, that when one thinks
that others are deficient in duty, he is the more liberal in giving
assistance.Thus the liberality of some escapes the notice of others.
In the matter of giving and receiving. He alludes to pecuniary matters, in
which there are two parts, the one receiving, the other expending. It is
necessary that these should be brought to an equality by mutual
compensation. There was an account of this nature carried on between
Paul and the Churches f249. While Paul administered the gospel to them,
there was an obligation devolving upon them in return for supplying what
was necessary for the support of his life, as he says elsewhere,
If we dispense to you spiritual thinqs, is it a great matter if you
give in return carnal things? (<460911>1 Corinthians 9:11.)
Hence, if the other churches had relieved Paul’s necessities, they would
have been giving nothing gratuitously, but would have been simply paying
their debt, for they ought to have aclcnowledged themselves indebted to
him for the gospel. This, however, he acknowledges, had not been the case,
inasmuch as they had not laid out anything on his account. What base
ingratitude, and how very unseemly, to treat such an Apostle with neglect,
to whom they knew themselves to be under obligation beyond their power
to discharge! On the other hand, how great the forbearance of this holy
man, to bear with their inhumanity with so much gentleness and
indulgence, as not to make use of one sharp word by way of accusing
them!
17. Not that I demand a gift. Again he repels an unfavourable opinion that
might be formed of immoderate cupidity, that they might not suppose that
it was an indirect hint f250, as if they ought singly to stand in the room of

all f251, and as if he abused their kindness. He accordingly declares, that he
consulted not so much his own advantage as theirs. “While I receive from
you,”says he, “there is proportionably much advantage that redounds to
yourselves; for there are just so many articles that you may reckon to have
been transferred to the table of accounts.”The meaning of this word f252 is
connected with the similitude formerly employed of exchange or
compensation in pecuniary matters.
18. I have received all things, and abound. He declares in more explicit
terms, that he has what is sufficient, and honors their liberality with a
remarkable testimony, by saying, that he has been filled. It was
undoubtedly a moderate sum that they had sent, but he says, that by
means of that moderate sum he is filled to satiety. It is, however, a more
distinguished commendation that he bestows upon the gift in what
follows, when he calls it a sacrifice acceptable, and presented as the odour
of a good fragrance. For what better thing can be desired than that our acts
of kindness should be sacred offerings, which God receives from our
hands, and takes pleasure in their sweet odour? For the same reason Christ
says, Whatsoever ye shall have done unto one of the least of these, ye have
done it unto me.
The similitude of sacrifices, however, adds much emphasis, by which we
are taught, that the exercise of love which God enjoins upon us, is not
merely a benefit conferred upon man, but is also a spiritual and sacred
service which is performed to God, as we read in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that he is well pleased with such sacrifices. (<581316>Hebrews
13:16.) Alas for our indolence! f253—which appears in this, that while God
invites us with so much kindness to the honor of priesthood, and even
puts sacrifices in our hands, we nevertheless do not sacrifice to him, and
those things which were set apart for sacred oblations we not only lay out
for profane uses, but squander them wickedly upon the most polluted
contaminations. f254 For the altars, on which sacrifices from our resources
ought to be presented, are the poor, and the servants of Christ. To the
neglect of these some squander their resources on every kind of luxury,
others upon the palate, others upon immodest attire, others upon
magnificent dwellings. f255
19. My God will supply. Some read impleat—in the optative—May he
supply. f256 While I do not reject this reading, I approve more of the other.

He expressly makes mention of God as his, because he owns and
acknowledges as done to himself whatever kindness is shewn to his
servants. They had therefore been truly sowing in the Lord’s field, from
which a sure and abundant harvest might be expected. Nor does he promise
them merely a reward in the future life, but even in respect of the
necessities of the present life: “Do not think that you have impoverished
yourselves; God, whom I serve, will abundantly furnish you with
everything necessary for you.”The phrase, in glory, ought to be taken in
place of the adverb gloriously, as meaning magnificently, or splendidly. He
adds, however, by Christ, in whose name everything that we do is
acceptable to God.
20. Now to our God and Father. This may be taken as a general
thanksgiving, by which he closes the epistle; or it may be viewed as
bearing more particularly upon the last clause in reference to the liberality
shewn to Paul f257. For in respect of the assistance which the Philipplans
had afforded him, it became him to reckon himself indebted to them for it
in such a manner as to acknowledge, that this aid had been afforded to
them by the mercy of God.
22. The brethren that are with me salute you. In these salutations he names
first of all his intimate associates, f258 afterwards all the saints in general,
that is, the whole Church at Rome, but chiefly those of the household of
Nero—a thing well deserving to be noticed; for it is no common evidence
of divine mercy, that the gospel had made its way into that sink of all
crimes and iniquities. It is also the more to be admired, in proportion as it
is a rare thing for holiness to reign in the courts of sovereigns. The
conjecture formed by some, that Seneca is here referred to among others,
has no appearance of foundation; for he never gave any evidence, even the
smallest, of his being a Christian; nor did he belong to the household of
Caesar, but was a senator, and had at one time held the office of praetor
f259.
END OF THE COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO
THE PHILIPPIANS.

FOOTNOTES
TRANSLATORS PREFACE
 Ft1 Les Eloges des Hommes Savans.”— Tom. 1:p. 240.
 Ft2 “Merits of CALVIN,”pp. 6, 31.
 Ft3 Ibid., pp. 65, 66.
 Ft4 CALVIN’S Tracts, vol. 1:
 Ft5 “CALVIN and the Swiss Reformation,”p. 350.
 Ft6 Dr. Mason of New York
 Ft7 Foster’s Essays, (Lond. 1819,) p. 5.
 Ft8 “Narrative of a Mission of Inquiry to the Jews,”p. 339.
 Ft9 Eadie’s Biblical Cyclopædia, Art. Colossians.
 Ft10 Howe’s Works, (Lond. 1822,) vol. 3. p. 435.
 Ft11 Illustrated Commentary, vol. 5:p. 297.
 Ft12 Fuller’s Works, vol. 4:
 Ft13 CALVIN’S Tracts, vol. 1:.
THE ARGUMENT
 Ft14 Caesar’s celebrated victory over Pompey took place on the plains of
Pharsalia, in Thessaly, with which Philippi in Macedonia is sometimes
confounded by the poets. (See Virg. G. I. 490, Juvenal, 8:242.) Their
being sometimes confounded with each other appears to have arisen
from the circumstance that there was near Pharsalos, in Thessaly, a
town named Philippi, the original name of which was Thebae,
distinguished from Thebae in Bœotia by its being called Thebae
Thessaliae, or Phthioticae, but having fallen under the power of Philip,
King of Macedon, was in honor of the conqueror called Philippi, or
Philippopolis. — Ed.

 Ft15 The decisive engagement referred to was, as Dio Cassius observes, the
most important of all that were fought during the civil wars, as it
determined the fate of Roman liberty, so that the contest
thenceforward was not for freedom, but — what master the Romans
should serve. From its having been fought on the plains of Philippi, it
is called by Suetonius Philippense bellum, (the battle of Philippi,) Suet.
Aug. 13; and by Pliny, Philippense praelium, (the engagement at
Philippi.) — Ed.
 ft16 “Vne vision enuoyee de Dieu;”— “A vision sent from God.”
 ft17 “Auoyent essayer les esbranler;”— “Had attempted to shake them.”
 Ft18 “De s’apprestre a tout ce qu’il plaira a Dieu leur enuoyer;”— “To be
prepared for everything that it shall please God to send upon them.”
 Ft19 “Et pour leur donner courage, afin qu’ils ne se laissent cependant
abuser;”— “And with the view of encouraging them, that they may not
allow themselves in the meantime to go astray.”
 Ft20 “Il excuse Epaphrodite de ce qu’il auoit tant demeuré sans retourner
vers eux;”— “He excuses Epaphroditus for having remained so long,
instead of returning to them.”
 Ft21 “Pour laquelle ils debatoyent, voulans qu’elle fust obseruee;”— “For
which they contended, being desirous that it should be observed.”
 Ft22 “Arrogance et vanterie;”— “Arrogance and boasting.”
